[{"Alex": "Welcome to the podcast, where we dive into the internet's weirdest corners! Today, we're tackling deceptive humor \u2013 think fake news with a punchline. Sounds crazy, right? I'm Alex, and I'm thrilled to have Jamie with us, ready to unravel this digital mystery!", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! Deceptive humor\u2026it sounds like a minefield. I mean, where do you even start with that?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Well, we started with a pretty big question: How do we even begin to understand how humor can spread misinformation? So, we created the Deceptive Humor Dataset, or DHD, to take a crack at the challenge.", "Jamie": "DHD, got it. So what exactly is the DHD? Is it like a collection of memes?"}, {"Alex": "It's a bit more structured than that. It's a dataset of comments generated from false narratives, with a touch of humor. Think of it as a training ground for AI to spot the difference between a harmless joke and a potentially harmful lie.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so it's AI-generated humor based on fake news? That's kind of meta. Who's writing these jokes, robots?"}, {"Alex": "Sort of! We used the ChatGPT-40 model to generate these comments. We gave it a false claim, and then tasked it to create a funny response. Each response is labelled according to a satire level and a specific humor category.", "Jamie": "So it's not just random jokes, there's some order to it. What kind of humor are we talking about? Is it all dad jokes and puns?"}, {"Alex": "We wanted to capture the range of online humor, so we classified it into five categories: Dark Humor, Irony, Social Commentary, Wordplay, and Absurdity.", "Jamie": "Dark humor and fake news...that sounds like a recipe for disaster. Is that what you found?"}, {"Alex": "That's definitely one of the concerns! The dataset is in multiple languages, including English, Telugu, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil, and code-mixed variants.", "Jamie": "Why so many languages? Is deceptive humor a global problem?"}, {"Alex": "Misinformation is definitely a global problem. Focusing on these languages helps address gaps in the current language model capabilities. Also, India presents a unique opportunity to study multilingual and code-mixed communication.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So it\u2019s not just about the language itself but also how people mix languages online."}, {"Alex": "Exactly. Think of how people might casually throw in English words into their native language when they\u2019re online. It\u2019s a really common phenomenon, and it adds another layer of complexity to detecting deceptive humor.", "Jamie": "Okay, I see. So, what were some of the challenges in creating this dataset? It sounds like it would be hard to find reliable fake claims."}, {"Alex": "That's right. To ensure reliability, we scraped fake narratives from well-known fact-checking websites. It's kind of like sourcing our poison directly from the lab, rather than trusting something we found on the street.", "Jamie": "That makes sense. So, you have your fake claims, your AI generating humor, and then\u2026what? Do you just unleash it on the world?"}, {"Alex": "Not quite! To ensure the quality of the dataset, we had language experts, all adults, monitoring the content, making sure nothing would negatively impact younger audiences. Then, we used those to develop baselines for future research.", "Jamie": "So, responsible AI joke-telling... I never thought I would hear that."}, {"Alex": "Precisely! So, how did existing AI models actually perform with the DHD? Did they laugh or cry... or, more importantly, did they identify the deceptive humor?", "Jamie": "I'm dying to know! Did your robot joke detectors actually work?"}, {"Alex": "Well, existing models that perform well on humor or misinformation individually struggle when dealing with deceptive humor.", "Jamie": "So, it's harder than just detecting the joke or the lie separately. It's the combination that throws them off?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It requires fact verification, understanding intent, and recognizing the humor, all at the same time. Current humor datasets focus on linguistic humor, not fact-aware humor from fabricated claims.", "Jamie": "Umm, so the models are like, 'I get the joke, but I don't get *why* it's a joke.'"}, {"Alex": "Pretty much! That\u2019s why we need new approaches that integrate both humor understanding and misinformation detection.", "Jamie": "Got it. This is all fascinating, but a little scary. If AI can generate deceptive humor, and existing models can't detect it effectively... what's the solution?"}, {"Alex": "That's the million-dollar question! Our research points to the urgent need for novel approaches that can handle the complex interplay of language, context, and factual accuracy.", "Jamie": "So, more research, more data, and smarter algorithms?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! And also thinking critically about the ethical considerations. We need to prevent this dataset from being used for creating malicious content.", "Jamie": "Right, because a dataset of deceptive humor could be misused pretty easily..."}, {"Alex": "Indeed. That's why we've released DHD for academic and research purposes only, with strict prohibitions on commercial use or application in real-world misinformation campaigns.", "Jamie": "It\u2019s good to know you\u2019re thinking about the responsible side of things. So, what are the next steps in this research area?"}, {"Alex": "Well, we hope that DHD will serve as a benchmark for future research in computational humor understanding, especially in multilingual contexts. But this also extends to social media content moderation, and misinformation detection.", "Jamie": "It sounds like you\u2019ve really opened up a can of worms, in a good way! It is very insightful."}, {"Alex": "It's a complex problem, but also a crucial one. Understanding deceptive humor is more critical than ever.", "Jamie": "So, Alex, if our listeners want to dive deeper, where can they find the paper?"}, {"Alex": "It's available on arXiv. Just search for ", "Jamie": "Deceptive Humor Dataset"}]