[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving into something super fascinating: using AI to uncover hidden stories in language history! Think of it as digital time-travel for words. We've got Jamie here with us, ready to explore this wild linguistic adventure.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! This sounds incredibly cool. So, AI can really dig into how language has changed? I\u2019m excited to learn more!"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! We're going to unpack a recent paper about pre-training language models for diachronic linguistic change discovery. Basically, we're using AI to find out how words and grammar evolve over time.", "Jamie": "Diachronic\u2026 okay, big word! So, it's about changes happening across time. But why language models? What makes them good for this?"}, {"Alex": "Great question! Language models, like the ones powering your smart assistant, learn patterns from huge amounts of text. This helps them spot subtle shifts in how we use words and construct sentences that humans might miss.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so it's like giving a computer a giant library and asking it to find the differences between the old books and the new ones?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And this paper looks at a clever way to train these models specifically to respect historical periods, not just gobble up all the text at once.", "Jamie": "Okay, I'm intrigued! So how did the researchers actually set this up? What kind of data did they use?"}, {"Alex": "They used texts from Project Gutenberg, a massive online library of free ebooks. But the cool part is how they carefully dated each text to create distinct historical slices, like 1750-1820, 1820-1850, and so on.", "Jamie": "Wow, that sounds like a lot of work! How did they ensure the dates were accurate? Did they just trust the publication dates on the books?"}, {"Alex": "That's where their date-attribution pipeline comes in. They combined information from Wikidata, the Project Gutenberg Catalog, and even used another AI model to infer publication dates when needed.", "Jamie": "So, AI is dating old books using other AI... that's kinda meta! Did this dating process actually work well? Was it pretty accurate?"}, {"Alex": "It was impressively accurate! They tested several models, and a version of Llama3 performed admirably. They were able to reliably assign publication dates. So, with the books organized by time period, what did they do next?", "Jamie": "Yeah, I'm curious how they actually trained the language models to detect language changes. Did they just throw all the data in and hope for the best?"}, {"Alex": "Not at all! They used two main approaches. First, they fine-tuned a large pre-trained model, Llama3, on each historical slice. Second, they pre-trained smaller models, BabyLlama-2, from scratch on each slice.", "Jamie": "Okay, so one approach builds on an existing model, and the other starts fresh. Why do both? What\u2019s the advantage of each method?"}, {"Alex": "The idea is to see if pre-training on a specific historical domain gives you better results than just adapting a general model. It's like asking, 'Is it better to raise a language model in a specific historical period, or just give it a history lesson later?'", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, did one method clearly outperform the other in identifying these language changes?"}, {"Alex": "That's where it gets really interesting! They found that the pre-trained models, the BabyLlama-2 ones, were actually better at respecting the boundaries between historical periods.", "Jamie": "Whoa, really? So the models raised in those digital historical periods were more sensitive to the nuances of language then?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! The fine-tuned models, because they already knew so much, tended to \"leak\" information across time periods, making it harder to isolate specific changes.", "Jamie": "Ah, so it's like they were too smart for their own good! But how did they actually measure this 'respect' for historical boundaries? What metrics did they use?"}, {"Alex": "They used perplexity, which measures how surprised a model is by a given text. A lower perplexity means the model finds the text more predictable, hence more in line with what it learned.", "Jamie": "Got it. So, a model trained on the 1800s should be less surprised by text from the 1800s than text from the 1900s. Did they find specific examples of linguistic changes using this method?"}, {"Alex": "Tons! They detected everything from massive lexical changes \u2013 words falling out of favor \u2013 to non-lexical changes, like shifts in grammar and morphology.", "Jamie": "That's incredible! Can you give me a specific example of a word or phrase they tracked?"}, {"Alex": "Sure. They looked at the phrase \"end of the line\" and found that the pre-trained models captured how its meaning evolved over time. Early models didn't understand the modern figurative sense, but later ones did.", "Jamie": "So, the models didn't just spot changes; they also gave hints about *why* those changes happened. That\u2019s a real breakthrough!"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! They also found fascinating shifts related to the word \"station\", with the rise of railways influencing its usage, and the models reflected that.", "Jamie": "Wow, that\u2019s almost like the AI is reading the subtext of history! This approach sounds really powerful for linguistic research, and beyond!"}, {"Alex": "It is! The paper mentions potential applications in literary studies and history, helping us understand how knowledge and social structures evolve.", "Jamie": "So, instead of just analyzing dry statistics, you could use these methods to understand shifts in cultural ideas as they start to get used in writing. Makes perfect sense!"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It opens the door to automated hypothesis generation \u2013 letting the AI suggest potential linguistic changes for researchers to investigate.", "Jamie": "That's mind-blowing. So, what are the limitations? Are there things this approach *can't* do, or areas where it needs improvement?"}, {"Alex": "One limitation is the size of the training data. While they used a clever pipeline, Project Gutenberg isn't representative of all historical English. Also, the models are relatively small compared to modern LLMs.", "Jamie": "Okay, so more data and bigger models could lead to even better results. What are some of the next steps for this research?"}, {"Alex": "The authors suggest expanding the training corpora and testing the approach on different corpus divisions, like genre or author style. They also want to explore knowledge-level hypotheses \u2013 how shifts in language reflect broader changes in understanding.", "Jamie": "This has been absolutely fascinating, Alex! Thanks for breaking down this research in such an accessible way. I\u2019m definitely going to read the paper!"}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! So, to sum up, this research shows how efficient pre-training techniques can unlock hidden stories in language history, offering new ways to study how words and grammar evolve. It's a powerful tool for exploring the past and shaping the future of linguistic research. This method could open up new avenues for research and for understanding historical perspectives from texts.", "Jamie": "This is ground breaking! Thanks so much for your expertise and time."}]