[{"Alex": "Welcome, everyone, to the podcast where we unravel the mysteries of AI one research paper at a time! Today, we're diving into some seriously cool stuff about how to make AI think\u2026 like, *really* think. Forget simple calculations; we're talking complex reasoning, the kind that makes these models go from 'smart' to 'whoa, that's impressive!' I'm Alex, your MC, and I have spent way too much time in this paper to call myself anything but an expert, here with me is Jamie, ready to grill me with questions.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! Super excited to dig into this. When you say *really* think, what are we actually talking about here? What problem is this paper trying to solve?"}, {"Alex": "Great question, Jamie! So, imagine you're teaching an AI to solve a really tough problem. Current AI models often struggle because they can't handle long texts or require a lot of trial and error to learn. It's like they get stuck after the first attempt. This paper introduces a new approach called 'Multi-round Thinking,' a method to enhance the reasoning process of large language models *without* needing massive amounts of extra training. Think of it as giving the AI a chance to reconsider its answers.", "Jamie": "Multi-round Thinking... So, it's like letting the AI sleep on it and try again? Sounds interesting. How is this different from just, umm, asking the model the same question multiple times?"}, {"Alex": "That\u2019s a fantastic way to put it! It's similar, but with a crucial twist. We don't just ask the same question. We feed the AI its *previous* answer as part of the *new* question. So, it's not starting from scratch each time. It's building upon its prior attempt, reconsidering and refining its answer based on what it already proposed.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, the AI is kind of 'arguing' with itself, pushing for a better solution. Can you walk me through the mechanics? Like, what does this look like in practice?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! Let's say we give the AI an original question\u2014the \u2018user prompt.\u2019 In the first round, the AI gives its best shot. In the subsequent rounds, we create a new prompt that includes the original question AND the AI's previous answer. The magic words are: 'The assistant\u2019s previous answer is: [previous answer], and please re-answer.' This forces the model to think twice, considering the prior answer and refining as needed.", "Jamie": "Okay, I\u2019m getting a clearer picture now. So you are literally prompting the model to consider its past response. What models did the researchers test this Multi-round Thinking approach on?"}, {"Alex": "They used some heavy hitters, including QwQ-32B and DeepSeek-R1, and also their distilled version. These are pretty advanced language models. Testing it on different models helps confirm that the approach isn't just a fluke specific to one particular AI.", "Jamie": "Got it. And where did they test it? What kind of benchmarks were used to measure the improvements?"}, {"Alex": "They threw a whole battery of tests at it! AIME 2024, MATH-500, GPQA-diamond, and LiveCodeBench. These benchmarks cover different areas, from complex mathematical problem-solving to graduate-level question answering and even coding tasks. It\u2019s a comprehensive workout to see how well the models can really *think*.", "Jamie": "Wow, that sounds thorough. So, what were the results? Did this Multi-round Thinking thing actually\u2026 work?"}, {"Alex": "It absolutely did! Across the board, they saw performance improvements. For example, on the AIME 2024 dataset, the accuracy of QwQ-32B improved from 80.3% in the first round to 82.1% in the second. DeepSeek-R1 also showed a similar bump. These results really validate the effectiveness of the approach.", "Jamie": "That\u2019s a solid improvement, especially on something as tricky as the AIME. Are these improvements consistent across all the different benchmarks?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, but the degree of improvement varied a bit. The researchers observed that Multi-round Thinking was particularly effective on reasoning-heavy tasks like GPQA-Diamond and LiveCodeBench, where models could really leverage the iterative refinement process. It's like the more complex the problem, the more benefit the models derived from thinking twice.", "Jamie": "That makes intuitive sense. What about the quality of answers? I'm curious, were the models not just improving in accuracy, but maybe also in clarity or conciseness?"}, {"Alex": "That's a very insightful question, Jamie! The researchers dug into this as well. Through lexical analysis, they tracked the usage of specific discourse markers\u2014words like 'but,' 'wait,' 'maybe,' and 'therefore.' They found that in later rounds, models tended to use fewer hesitation-related words, suggesting greater confidence and decisiveness in their reasoning.", "Jamie": "Ah, that's fascinating! So less 'umm' and 'ahh,' and more 'aha!' moments. It's almost like we can 'hear' the AI becoming more sure of itself."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It's not just about getting the right answer; it's about how the AI *arrives* at that answer. They also noticed that the length of the responses tended to decrease over time, implying that the models were becoming more concise and efficient in their explanations.", "Jamie": "Very interesting. I wonder if these models are actually getting better at reasoning or just better at sounding confident even if wrong?"}, {"Alex": "That\u2019s a brilliant question, Jamie. And something the researchers also considered. It appears the model becomes increasingly better at reasoning to arrive at more correct answer, as evident as more correct answer in the Multi-round Thinking tends to become more confident, fluent, and decisive in its responses", "Jamie": "That\u2019s amazing to see the research considering the nuances of the model becoming more confident not just accurate"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. In fact, the researchers did some preliminary work combining Multi-round Thinking with supervised fine-tuning (SFT). The idea was to explicitly train the model to fix its earlier mistakes.", "Jamie": "Hmm. Did that combo lead to further improvements?"}, {"Alex": "Interestingly, in their initial experiments, they didn't see a significant performance boost. But they believe it's a promising direction for future research, especially focusing on the quality of training data and fine-tuning strategies specifically tailored for iterative reasoning.", "Jamie": "So, it's still early days for that approach. What are some of the limitations of Multi-round Thinking as it stands now?"}, {"Alex": "One key limitation is the increased waiting time, Jamie. Since the model has to go through multiple rounds of thinking, it naturally takes longer to generate a final answer. This could be a concern in real-world applications where speed is critical. Although, the improvements in answer quality may be worth the trade off in some circumstances.", "Jamie": "That makes sense. Speed vs. accuracy, the eternal trade-off! What other avenues for future research does this paper open up?"}, {"Alex": "Well, the authors suggest exploring different ways to integrate the first-round response into the thinking process. For example, instead of simply concatenating the previous answer to the prompt, you could use it in other ways to guide the model's reasoning. Also, exploring different fine-tuning strategies tailored for iterative reasoning seems very promising. And thinking about the actual compute costs and how we can balance additional reasoning against model costs are all wide open for exploration.", "Jamie": "Lots of exciting possibilities there! Is this approach actually useful and can be implemented in real products?"}, {"Alex": "That's a very important point to ask, and the answer is YES! The beauty of Multi-round Thinking is that it\u2019s incredibly practical. You can easily incorporate the first-round response into the subsequent thinking process, effectively boosting performance without requiring any additional training. However, this does introduce additional waiting time during the thinking phase.", "Jamie": "That's amazing! Any exciting future direction for the Multi-round Thinking to explore?"}, {"Alex": "One exciting potential lies in Language Agent Tree Search (LATS). LATS is designed for complex tasks, involving multiple steps and decision points. One key advantage of LATS is the ability to explore multiple reasoning paths simultaneously, and by combining with Multi-round Thinking, can improve its language model reasoning and planning", "Jamie": "That's great to know there's even more potential in Multi-round Thinking. This has been incredibly enlightening, Alex. Thanks for breaking down this complex research in such an accessible way!"}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! It's been a fun conversation. Before we wrap up, let's recap the key takeaway: Multi-round Thinking offers a simple yet powerful way to enhance the reasoning abilities of large language models without the need for extensive retraining. By allowing models to iteratively refine their answers, we can unlock greater accuracy, confidence, and clarity in their responses.", "Jamie": "It sounds like a game-changer. With just a little bit of prompting re-engineering, all of a sudden we can achieve so much."}, {"Alex": "And, more importantly, this research opens up exciting new avenues for exploring test-time scaling techniques, paving the way for more robust, reliable, and explainable AI systems. This approach can lead to the use of a new breed of models that truly reason like humans, break cognitive inertia, and correct entrenched reasoning errors. It's a really exciting time to be working in AI!", "Jamie": "Alex, thanks for spending the time on discussing this paper. This is indeed the future"}, {"Alex": "Thank you, Jamie, for being a fantastic guest and asking all the right questions. And thank you, everyone, for tuning in! Join us next time as we tackle another fascinating piece of AI research.", "Jamie": ""}]