[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving into some seriously cool tech that's about to blow your mind: Visual Geometry Grounded Transformers or, as I like to call it, VGGT! I'm your host, Alex, and I'm stoked to have Jamie with us today to unpack this fascinating research. Jamie, ready to have your perception of 3D reconstruction changed forever?", "Jamie": "Absolutely, Alex! When I read 'reconstruct images in under a second,' my jaw dropped. I am ready to dive in!"}, {"Alex": "Alright, so at its core, VGGT is all about taking a bunch of 2D images \u2013 think photos from your phone or drone footage \u2013 and turning them into a full 3D understanding of the scene. We're talking cameras, depth, the whole shebang. But what makes VGGT a game-changer is that it does all this super efficiently, often faster than traditional methods.", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's like magic\u2026but with algorithms? Can you give me a sense of what exactly VGGT predicts? And what makes it so different from other methods?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! VGGT predicts cameras, point maps, depth maps, and 3D point tracks from the input images. The key is that it's a feed-forward neural network; it just takes the images and boom, spits out all the 3D attributes in one go. Traditional methods often involve iterative optimization, which can be quite slow. VGGT bypasses a lot of that, making it incredibly fast and often more accurate.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so it's not tweaking and refining like other methods? How many images are we talking here? From, like, one? Or does it need a whole camera array?"}, {"Alex": "That\u2019s right, minimal tweaking involved and the image number is anything from a single image to potentially hundreds of images to reconstruct the scene; more images equals more information to create the 3D model. This approach is a step forward because typically models have been constrained to specialized single tasks.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. Now, you mentioned it's a 'transformer.' Is this like the same technology behind those massive language models?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! VGGT leverages the power of transformer architecture, similar to what's used in models like GPT and Stable Diffusion. It's been trained on vast quantities of 3D-annotated data. The model also alternates frame-wise and global attention to strike a balance between normalising activations within each image and also integrating information across the different images. The basic idea is that instead of hand-crafting specific algorithms, we let the model learn directly from the data.", "Jamie": "Aha, so that's how it gets so good at predicting all those 3D things. And with the pre training, can that be fine-tuned for more downstream applications?"}, {"Alex": "Oh, absolutely! That's one of the coolest parts. VGGT\u2019s features can be fine-tuned for downstream tasks, like point tracking in dynamic videos or even creating novel view synthesis. It's like giving other AI systems a 3D vision boost. Our research actually shows that using VGGT as a feature backbone significantly enhances these downstream tasks.", "Jamie": "So, VGGT not only creates these detailed 3D models but then enhances these processes, such as novel view synthesis or even dynamic point tracking? Can you explain those a little more?"}, {"Alex": "Happy to! For novel view synthesis, imagine taking a scene and rendering it from a viewpoint that didn\u2019t exist in the original set of images. It\u2019s like magic, allowing you to explore the 3D space from completely new angles. Dynamic point tracking is where we track specific points across a video, even when objects are moving or being obstructed. VGGT\u2019s features make this tracking much more robust and accurate.", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's making AI better at seeing and understanding movement! Now, I'm curious about the architecture of VGGT. You mentioned the transformer aspect, but how does it process the images and come up with these 3D estimations?"}, {"Alex": "Great question! First, the input images are broken down into smaller tokens, kind of like puzzle pieces, using a model called DINO. Then, we add special tokens for the camera information. After that, the tokens go through alternating layers of frame-wise and global self-attention, which helps the model relate information within each image and across all images. Finally, prediction heads for different 3D attributes \u2013 cameras, depth, etc. \u2013 process the tokens to generate the final output.", "Jamie": "So the model uses self-attention and then decodes the images to derive the camera extrinsics and intrinsics to find its relative position and orientation. I am curious, is it permutation invariant for the order of the input images?"}, {"Alex": "That's absolutely correct, you are following so far and thinking of all the right things to consider. Except for the first image, which serves as the reference frame, the order of the rest is arbitrary. The network is designed to be permutation equivariant for all but the first frame. This design ensures consistent 3D reconstruction regardless of the input sequence. ", "Jamie": "That makes sense, it's good to establish a standard before performing the functions. Can you remind me what datasets the model was trained on again?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely. We trained VGGT on a large and diverse collection of datasets, including CO3Dv2, BlendMVS, DL3DV, MegaDepth, ScanNet\u2026 just to name a few. These datasets span various domains, including indoor and outdoor environments, synthetic and real-world scenarios. The 3D annotations are derived from direct sensor capture, synthetic engines, or even SfM techniques. The combination of the datasets is broadly comparable to those of MASt3R in size and diversity.", "Jamie": "That's a wide spectrum of data, it's no wonder why the model is so good with all the different images. Does the method have some limitations?"}, {"Alex": "Of course. While VGGT demonstrates strong generalization, it does have some limitations. It doesn't currently support fisheye or panoramic images, and performance can dip with extreme input rotations. Also, while it handles minor non-rigid motions, it struggles with substantial non-rigid deformations. But the good news is, addressing these limitations can be straightforward by fine-tuning the model on targeted datasets.", "Jamie": "Okay, those sound like solvable challenges for future iterations. Speaking of the future, what\u2019s next for VGGT? Where do you see this research heading?"}, {"Alex": "Great question! There's a lot of potential. One exciting direction is incorporating differentiable bundle adjustment, as it could serve as an effective supervision signal in scenarios lacking explicit 3D annotations. Another area is exploring single-view reconstruction to simplify some processes.", "Jamie": "Interesting, refining the model so that it can be trained to tackle all sorts of issues. Can you touch a little more on the point map, it was one of the predictions of VGGT?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! The point map predicts the 3D scene points and is what leads to VGGT's strong performance and 3D understanding. Traditionally, creating or predicting this point map can be computationally expensive, but VGGT simplifies the process in a feed-forward manner. It has a seamless integration with the downstream applications.", "Jamie": "Incredible! It sounds like VGGT is a game changer. A question about the speed that is mentioned. Can you delve a little more? Is this something that requires the use of specific hardwares?"}, {"Alex": "Happy to! VGGT is really designed for efficiency, and while you get the best performance on higher-end GPUs. Our timings were done with an NVIDIA H100 GPU but you can run it on different hardwares. It is able to achieve 0.2 seconds when operating, and is 50x faster than some other top methods, which is part of the innovation here.", "Jamie": "Those numbers are pretty amazing. Okay, I think I've got a good handle on the basics of VGGT. Is there a specific element of the paper that you find most exciting or groundbreaking?"}, {"Alex": "For me, it's the paradigm shift from optimization-based methods to a neural-first approach. The fact that VGGT can achieve state-of-the-art results in multiple 3D tasks, often outperforming traditional methods, with minimal post-processing, is remarkable. It opens doors to real-time applications and democratizes access to 3D reconstruction technology.", "Jamie": "That makes sense, the versatility of the method is really impressive. Before we wrap up, can you tell us where people can find the code and models to try VGGT out themselves?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! The code and models are publicly available on GitHub, at github.com/facebookresearch/vggt. We encourage everyone to check it out, experiment with it, and contribute to the project. We\u2019re always looking for feedback and new ideas.", "Jamie": "Thank you for that great information and resources!"}, {"Alex": "No problem at all! It is really a great model and hopefully other developers and researchers benefit from it.", "Jamie": "Okay, let's switch it up for a second. Do you have some personal anecdotes of the research from when you were actually writing the paper, I am sure our listeners are curious about that."}, {"Alex": "Of course! During one of our trials, we started to see the images being constructed in near-real time, it was astonishing. It was really a team effort, with several individuals working to make sure it was up to par and pushing for higher qualities with the images.", "Jamie": "Oh it must have been something to see that in the works. Thank you for sharing that!"}, {"Alex": "It was our pleasure! Overall, Visual Geometry Grounded Transformer (VGGT) represents a significant leap forward in 3D computer vision. This research pushes the boundaries of what's possible with neural networks and demonstrates the power of learning-based approaches for complex 3D tasks.", "Jamie": "Okay, so let's conclude with a takeaway message. What is the high level message our audience can take away from the podcast?"}, {"Alex": "For sure! This means faster, more accurate 3D reconstruction, with huge implications for fields like robotics, augmented reality, and virtual reality. It is truly one of the greats. For our listeners, thank you for tuning in and see you next time!", "Jamie": "Thank you so much for having me, Alex! This was so fascinating!"}]