[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving deep into a mind-blowing question: Can we predict which AI models will become the next big thing? It's like 'Moneyball,' but for AI! I'm Alex, and I'm thrilled to have Jamie with me. Jamie, ready to peek into the future of AI?", "Jamie": "Absolutely, Alex! This sounds fascinating. I'm excited to learn how we can possibly predict something as dynamic as AI model adoption."}, {"Alex": "Okay, so the basic idea is that we looked at how open-weight AI models\u2014those with publicly available code\u2014grow in popularity on platforms like Hugging Face. We wanted to see if we could forecast their influence.", "Jamie": "Hugging Face, got it. So, these are models people can actually use and tweak themselves. Ummm, so what were you actually measuring?"}, {"Alex": "We tracked the number of 'fine-tuned' versions of each base model. Think of it like scientific papers citing each other. Each time someone adapts a model for a new task, it's like a citation showing the original model's impact.", "Jamie": "Ah, I see the analogy! Fine-tuning is adapting an existing model, making more derivative models, right? It's like a vote of confidence!"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Then we adapted a model originally used for scientific citations, using three main ingredients: immediacy, longevity, and relative fitness. Immediacy captures how quickly a model gains traction.", "Jamie": "Okay, makes sense. Some go viral, some are slow-burners."}, {"Alex": "Longevity, on the other hand, shows how well a model maintains its relevance over time. Will it be a flash in the pan, or will it become a staple? Finally, relative fitness is the model's intrinsic advantage compared to its peers.", "Jamie": "Hmm, like, how well it solves problems compared to the competition?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely. So, we fed all this Hugging Face data into our adapted model, and that gave us, what?", "Jamie": "So, what did you find? Were you actually able to predict model adoption?"}, {"Alex": "For many models, yes! The citation-style approach worked surprisingly well, giving us good fits to the real-world data. But outliers are where it got REALLY interesting!", "Jamie": "Outliers? You mean the models that didn\u2019t fit the prediction?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! They revealed unique patterns or sudden jumps in usage, like a model suddenly becoming popular due to a breakthrough application. It indicated that something special was going on.", "Jamie": "Wow, that's cool! So these outliers pointed to something beyond just the model's intrinsic qualities?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely. And that is where we started to think, well, that's got something to do with outside factors.", "Jamie": "like what? the models might not as successful as expected because of factors like company strategies and ecosystem positioning"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. Company strategies play a big role. Models released by Meta, Google, or BAAI showed different adoption curves, reflecting their open-source strategies. It's not just about how good the model is, but who's backing it and how.", "Jamie": "Ah, so it's like a company's reputation or existing user base can give a model a head start or really influence how long the model will exist as well."}, {"Alex": "Yep! So, we analyzed the fine-tuning trends from different organizations. We examined shifts in how models from various companies evolved in their attractiveness for general adaptation over time.", "Jamie": "Okay, so some companies' models might see initial rapid adoption but then plateau, while others grow steadily over time?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Some models enjoy early popularity and then saturate, while others have prolonged growth. Those factors indicate a lot about AI model adoption.", "Jamie": "And I guess that is why all companies and the research field keep close eyes on AI model adoption."}, {"Alex": "Absolutely, keeping up with AI model adoption can tell us a lot about the AI trend, what's working out there.", "Jamie": "You also looked at the download rates of these models, right? Did that confirm your fine-tuning findings?"}, {"Alex": "We did, but the download data was limited. We only had data from September 2024 onward. Still, we tried applying our framework, and the early results suggest it captures the saturation pattern\u2014downloads slow down after the initial rush.", "Jamie": "Got it. So more data is needed for downloads to really validate the adoption predictions?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely. A longer history of download data would strengthen our analysis. What is the impact on the industry by tracking these things?.", "Jamie": "I would imagine you can tell which base models drive downstream innovations."}, {"Alex": "Oh totally. The analysis presents a comparative view of fine-tuning trends across companies, highlighting variations in growth rates, early adoption, and long-term sustainability in the AI ecosystem.", "Jamie": "So, what's next for this research? Where do you see this going?"}, {"Alex": "Well, we need more data, especially on downloads. But we also want to integrate additional factors into our model\u2014things like licensing constraints or specific application domains.", "Jamie": "Right, because a model might be technically superior, but if it's difficult to use or restricted by its license, adoption will suffer."}, {"Alex": "Precisely. And longer-term, this framework could help industry leaders optimize their release strategies, and even help policymakers oversee AI governance.", "Jamie": "Wow, that's a really important point\u2014understanding AI model evolution is crucial for responsible AI development and deployment."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! To understand how open-weight models evolve and gain traction is so important. Also, we can help stakeholders better assess their long-term impact and diffusion.", "Jamie": "So, in a nutshell, this research applies concepts from citation analysis to predict the popularity and impact of open-weight AI models, revealing the importance of factors beyond just technical capabilities."}, {"Alex": "Exactly, Jamie! It's about understanding the dynamics of AI adoption and anticipating which models will shape the future. By tracking immediacy, longevity, and relative fitness, along with external influences like company strategies, we can get a clearer picture of the AI landscape.", "Jamie": "This has been super insightful, Alex! Thanks for sharing this fascinating research. It's exciting to think about predicting the future of AI, one fine-tuned model at a time!"}]