[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving headfirst into the absolutely mind-blowing world of AI and gaming! Forget everything you thought you knew because we\u2019re talking about creating games that *literally* create themselves. Think unlimited levels, personalized storylines, and enemies that learn faster than you do. Joining me to unpack this is Jamie, welcome to the podcast!", "Jamie": "Thanks, Alex! Super excited to be here. I've heard whispers about this 'generative gaming' stuff, but I'm ready for the deep dive."}, {"Alex": "Alright, let's start with the basics. Our paper is on Interactive Generative Video, or IGV, as the foundation for Generative Game Engines, or GGEs. Essentially, we're exploring how recent breakthroughs in AI video generation can revolutionize game creation.", "Jamie": "Okay, so\u2026no more relying on the same old assets and predictable storylines? That\u2019s sounds amazing, but how different are Generative Game Engines from old Game Engines?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Traditional game engines are limited by predetermined content. You are kind of stuck within what's already programmed and made by the developers. GGEs, powered by IGV, could, theoretically, create an infinite number of unique game experiences on the fly.", "Jamie": "Infinite, huh? That\u2019s a bold claim. So, umm, what are the key ingredients that make this Interactive Generative Video so special?"}, {"Alex": "Great question. IGV brings to the table this powerful ability to generate high-quality game content, model a physics-aware world, ensure user controlled interactivity, and have the whole world have a long-term causal reasoning", "Jamie": "Okay, I think I get it. so how do all these modules, Generation, Control, Memory, Dynamics, Intelligence\u2026 how exactly do they work together?"}, {"Alex": "Imagine it like a film studio. The Generation module is your special effects team cranking out the visuals. The Control Module helps to make these virtual entities go the way they want. The Memory Module maintains the history, the Dynamics modules create physically plausible motions, and the Intelligence module acts like the screenplay writer. These all interact to form a gaming experience", "Jamie": "Wow, that is an amazing explanation. Umm, I want to know more on the individual modules as well. Can you talk about one of them"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! Dynamics is the coolest. Current video generation can model the world to replicate a gravity, elasticity, explosions, collisions, and complex motion patterns of humans and animals.", "Jamie": "That does sound amazing. So, can it be extended beyond mimicking reality. Can they just define the basic rules, then tune it to be fun?"}, {"Alex": "Yes! In the module, there is actually a physics tuning functionality. In the racing simulators, we can adjust gravity, friction and the time. We can also modify time, velocity, and mass values, which is a concept that are not commonly seen!", "Jamie": "Wow, it truly seems like a brand new frontier of gaming."}, {"Alex": "That's right. The ability to create infinite content is nice, but what's more important is that GGE can leverage the huge amount of data from various sources, which means training and diversifying the game", "Jamie": "What about the gameplay? Does this affect the gameplay experience too?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! Because the content is no longer the main problem, so it is time to focus on the game design, and how to make people enjoy the game. We suggest using AI to design the GamePlay as well", "Jamie": "Sounds reasonable! Are there existing challenges that need to be resolved?"}, {"Alex": "Of course. In the paper, we summarized three. First, lack of physical understanding in generating video means it is hard to implement GGE. Second, is its limited memory ability. Finally, is reasoning. These are all technical barriers. But they all boil down to having data, training, and good video generator.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. What are the next steps? Is this something we\u2019ll see in actual games anytime soon?"}, {"Alex": "We outlined a five-level maturity model, from basic manual content creation to fully self-evolving game ecosystems. We're currently in the early stages, but the progress is rapid. I think we'll see some initial implementations within the next few years.", "Jamie": "That\u2019s exciting! So, if everything goes according to plan, what\u2019s the ultimate vision for these Generative Game Engines?"}, {"Alex": "Imagine truly open worlds that react to every player action in meaningful ways. Games that are never the same twice, personalized to your style of gameplay, and truly dynamic. A future where everyone can become a game designer.", "Jamie": "That sounds like science fiction! A world where people can create a video game so easily..."}, {"Alex": "The technology is rapidly catching up. Imagine being able to tell the engine, \"Create a city builder where climate change is a core mechanic.\" And the engine creates a game that actually plays like that. Think of the productivity it can boost and the creativity it can create", "Jamie": "That does sound like a dream come true, what kind of impact can this create."}, {"Alex": "I think it can create more than just games. It can create an interactive movie, it can create educational videos, or simulations. I think there is so much potential that it has yet to be found.", "Jamie": "I am very excited! What is the research direction to solve this technical barrier?"}, {"Alex": "There are mainly two avenues, and both of them are closely related: high quality data and good generator. If we have better dataset, the generator can learn better.", "Jamie": "Is there some benchmark right now to test the GGE world's physical law?"}, {"Alex": "That is a really good point. There are actually existing bench mark as you speak such as WorldSimBench.", "Jamie": "Interesting, how does WorldSimBench help generative model knows more about physics."}, {"Alex": "There is a dataset in the WorldSimBench called HF-Embodied dataset which is good for the generative model to know more on how the world moves.", "Jamie": "Seems that the dataset is more important."}, {"Alex": "That is absolutely right. The dataset that the current video generation model learned is based on many physical interactions. When they sees a new situation, they know how it can move.", "Jamie": "How to make more people be more aware of this area?"}, {"Alex": "Let's create it together. Let's work together to create a better GGE model and datasets to make the world aware of this space.", "Jamie": "Let's do it!"}, {"Alex": "Okay, everyone! That\u2019s it for today\u2019s conversation about GGE. The future of gaming hinges on AI's generative capabilities. It's about dynamic worlds, personalized experiences, and democratizing game creation. It\u2019s a long road, but it\u2019s one filled with incredible potential.", "Jamie": "Totally agree. Thanks for having me, Alex!"}]