[{"Alex": "Hey podcast listeners, buckle up! Today we're diving into the wild world of AI, specifically how well these language models *really* understand long stretches of code. Forget what you think you know about those context windows, because we're about to drop some truth bombs! I'm Alex, your resident tech guru, and I'm stoked to have Jamie here with me.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! I\u2019m Jamie, and honestly, I'm just trying to keep up with all this AI madness. 'Truth bombs' about AI understanding code? Sounds juicy, I am very much looking forward to learn more about this today!"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! So, we're talking about a new research paper called 'LONGCODEU: Benchmarking Long-Context Language Models on Long Code Understanding.' Basically, it\u2019s a new yardstick for measuring how well AI models can actually *understand* long pieces of code, not just memorize them.", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's like\u2026 giving an AI a really, really long textbook and then asking it questions to see if it actually read it, instead of just skimming the table of contents?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Current models *claim* to handle massive amounts of text, these so-called 128K to 1M context windows. But this paper puts those claims to the test when models meet the reality of complex code with LONGCODEU benchmark.", "Jamie": "Wow, those numbers sound huge! So what does LONGCODEU do differently from other benchmarks for coding AIs?"}, {"Alex": "That's a great question. LONGCODEU moves away from synthetic code or simple tasks like needle-in-a-haystack searches. It uses real-world code repositories, focusing on dependencies between different parts of the code and even documentation.", "Jamie": "So, it's not just about finding one specific function, it's about understanding how all the functions talk to each other and what the overall code does?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely. The paper breaks down code understanding into four key aspects: code unit perception \u2013 that's identifying basic elements, intra-code unit understanding - looking at the logic *within* a code block, inter-code unit relation understanding - that's understanding the relation across multiple code units, and long code documentation understanding.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. So, it's not just about reading the code, but also understanding *why* it's written that way. Could you give me an example of how the benchmark tests 'inter-code unit relation understanding'?"}, {"Alex": "Sure. Imagine you have a function that handles user authentication. The benchmark might test if the AI can identify *other* functions that are called by the authentication function, like functions that log failed attempts or update user profiles. Or perhaps if the model can use descriptions to pick out code units that generates code to satisfy the description.", "Jamie": "Gotcha, I see how that gets much more complex than just finding a specific line of code!"}, {"Alex": "And that's exactly the point! Now, they evaluated nine different language models, including some big names like GPT-4o and Claude 3.5 Sonnet, as well as code-specific models.", "Jamie": "Okay, so who aced the test? Any surprises in the rankings?"}, {"Alex": "Well, that's where things get interesting. The results showed significant limitations in current LCLMs. Performance *really* dropped off when the code length went beyond 32K tokens, far short of their claimed context windows.", "Jamie": "Whoa, seriously? So, those claims of handling hundreds of thousands of tokens\u2026 they're not really holding up in practice?"}, {"Alex": "Not when it comes to truly *understanding* complex code, no. And inter-code unit relation understanding turned out to be the most challenging aspect for these models.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that's surprising! So it's harder for them to connect the dots between different parts of the code than it is to understand each part individually?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It seems like current models struggle with the higher-level reasoning required to understand how different code units interact and contribute to the overall functionality. Especially for tasks like dependency relation analysis that tries to determine relations of code units from long code or from natural language.", "Jamie": "Fascinating. Okay, so what are the implications of these findings? Is AI-powered code generation doomed?"}, {"Alex": "Not at all! It just means we need to be realistic about what these models can currently do. The paper suggests that focusing on improving inter-code unit relation understanding is crucial for optimizing LCLMs for software engineering.", "Jamie": "So, it's about making them better at seeing the bigger picture, rather than just memorizing the individual pieces?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. And that could involve things like incorporating better methods for representing code dependencies, or training models on more diverse and realistic code repositories.", "Jamie": "Umm, so what are some other factors that can cause the performance differences among those LCLMs?"}, {"Alex": "The paper mentioned that it may results from the dependency on memorization. Even if the models do not perform very well with long context understanding, they may still perform memorization on long code. The paper did show the experiments results that verifies such phenomenon.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So the models may be better at doing memorization. Does that mean that we will need some evaluation metrics to measure memorization? "}, {"Alex": "That's correct. The paper also showed the evlauation metrics and it found that the models did perform much better when there is code context, comparing to the models that does not have code context. I think that such metrics is very useful for evaluating LLMs.", "Jamie": "Thanks for the summary of this, and I did find the metrics for evaluating LLMs, which is pretty cool!"}, {"Alex": "The paper also explores how the researchers can make decisions on the different long code lengths. And their conclusion may helps some new beginners to learn more about this field.", "Jamie": "Oh tell me more about the conclusion and the decision on long code lengths!"}, {"Alex": "Their conclusion is that if the length of the code is less than 16k, then they suggest to choose smaller LLMs. For long code documentations, they recommend to use the larger LLMs such as GPT-4o and Gemini-1.5-Flash. Their conclusion is very useful in practice and can save resources for developers.", "Jamie": "That is amazing and can save lots of time in practice!"}, {"Alex": "It also found some interesting case studies about the LCLMs. The results of LCLMs on the inter-code unit relation is still not very good. They find that the LCLMs often extracts the code units that structurally looks similar. This is also some area that we can focus on.", "Jamie": "I found the case study that you are talking about in the paper. And I do agree that the ability to distinguish the code units will be an import area in the future. "}, {"Alex": "Another thing that is also very cool is that this paper proposed some benchmark for real-world coding. The four aspects that they proposed seems very comprehensive and can be used for many coding-related aspects.", "Jamie": "Can you summarize the limitations of the paper? I wonder if there will be other future directions that we can improve."}, {"Alex": "Sure. There are still several limitations for this paper. First, the current benchmark is still a monolingual benchmark and uses Python. Secondly, some LCLMs cannot be fully evaluated due to the API's availability or stabilization. Thirdly, some LCLMs have longer context window but the benchmark in the paper does not support it.", "Jamie": "That sounds like lots of work in the future and I am very much looking forward to more cool things in the future! Is there anything else that you can share?"}, {"Alex": "Overall, this research is a wake-up call for the field. It highlights the need for more rigorous evaluation of long-context language models, especially in complex domains like software engineering. It's not enough to just have a large context window; we need to ensure these models can actually *reason* about the information they're processing. This paper will drive a better understanding of the capabilities of LCLMs and help optimize the software engineering! Thank you all for tuning in!", "Jamie": "Thanks, Alex! I definitely learned a lot about LONGCODEU today! So, keep it real folks, AI still has a long way to go, but at least we now have a better way to measure how far! It will be very helpful if there are future directions to solve the current limitations."}]