[{"Alex": "Hey podcast listeners, get ready to have your minds blown! We're diving into the wild world of AI evaluation: can these new-fangled thinking LLMs actually tell when another AI is doing a good job translating or summarizing? It\u2019s a battle of the brains, folks, DeepSeek vs. 03-mini! And to help me break it all down, I\u2019ve got Jamie with me.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, so excited to be here. I saw the title of the research and I immediately thought, 'Do we need AI to grade AI now?' It feels a bit like the robots are taking over\u2026or at least grading each other's homework!"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! So, this paper really digs into whether these reasoning-enabled large language models\u2014LLMs\u2014are any good at evaluating the natural language generation, that is, translation and summarization, of other models. Turns out, just being big and brainy doesn't automatically make you a good judge.", "Jamie": "Okay, so before we get too deep, what exactly are 'reasoning-enabled LLMs' and how do they differ from\u2026umm\u2026regular LLMs? Is it like giving an AI a tiny Sherlock Holmes hat?"}, {"Alex": "Haha, kind of! Reasoning-enabled LLMs are designed to perform complex, multi-step inference. They're the ones that can, supposedly, think through a problem, show their work, before spitting out an answer. Chain-of-thought prompting gives them step by step guides. And we're looking at DeepSeek and OpenAI's o3 models, the new and trendy.", "Jamie": "Gotcha. So, it\u2019s not just regurgitating information, but, like, actually processing it. How did the researchers actually test these LLMs as evaluators? What yardstick did they use?"}, {"Alex": "They pitted them against both machine translation (MT) and text summarization (TS) tasks using established benchmarks like WMT23 and SummEval. For translation, they used GEMBA-MQM, a method that prompts the LLMs to identify and rate translation errors. For summarization, it was G-Eval, which evaluates along dimensions like coherence and consistency.", "Jamie": "Okay, so real-world scenarios, not just textbook examples. What models did you test other than the two we mentioned and were they all different sizes?"}, {"Alex": "We sure did, we actually compared eight models in total. There were the state-of-the-art reasoning models, DeepSeek-R1 and OpenAI 03. Then, we threw in distilled, smaller versions of DeepSeek, and some run-of-the-mill models from GPT, Qwen, and Llama. It's a full architectural comparison!", "Jamie": "Distilled versions\u2026so like, watered-down reasoning? Does that impact how well they can judge? I'm guessing it's harder to be Sherlock Holmes with a smaller brain?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! That's one of the key questions we wanted to answer. And the short answer is: it depends. While OpenAI 03-mini models showed consistent improvement with more reasoning, DeepSeek-R1 often did worse than its non-reasoning version, oddly enough. The smaller, distilled models degrade substantially in accuracy.", "Jamie": "Wait, DeepSeek actually got *worse* with reasoning? That's\u2026counterintuitive. Any theories on why that might be?"}, {"Alex": "Yeah, it was a surprise! One theory is that DeepSeek's reasoning approach, the way it was trained, might not align with the nuances of NLG evaluation. Also, it could be not enough multilingual training data or fine-tuning for evaluation tasks. And the smaller distilled models lose critical elements of reasoning.", "Jamie": "So, it\u2019s not just about the size of the model, but how it was taught to think. What about OpenAI's o3-mini? Why did it do better with more reasoning?"}, {"Alex": "Good question! Our hypothesis is the o3-mini training elements were particularly suited for these evaluation tasks. Maybe they have broader multilingual exposure or specific fine-tuning for comparative assessment. At the same time, using that type of model requires adaptation of the evaluation prompt.", "Jamie": "That's a big takeaway - the way you teach the model to reason is just as important as giving it the ability to reason in the first place. And what does the way these models use 'reasoning tokens' tell us? That sounds like some kind of AI currency!"}, {"Alex": "Haha, that's a great analogy. We looked at the correlation between reasoning token usage and evaluation quality. Turns out, in the o3-mini models, more reasoning tokens often meant better evaluation. But again, this wasn't always the case with DeepSeek, highlighting those architecture-specific differences.", "Jamie": "So, more 'thinking' doesn't always equal better results, especially if the 'thinking' isn't focused. What were the specific tasks in MT and TS that these models struggled with, if there were any?"}, {"Alex": "Well, DeepSeek struggled with many TS tasks while consistently improving the consistency metrics. Meanwhile, certain translation tasks showed superior performances for OpenAI models. That leads us to believe that translation and summarization evaluation may require distinct reasoning strategies.", "Jamie": "That definitely sounds complicated! But really interesting. Does this mean that all current benchmarks are in questions since we have models that are better suited for specific tasks?"}, {"Alex": "It's a really good question. Benchmarks are always evolving. Our research indicates existing LLM-based metrics often use non-reasoning LLMs and may benefit from integrating reasoning-enabled LLMs, particularly if tailored to the specific task. Basically, AI grading needs a more nuanced approach.", "Jamie": "Nuance is key. That's a point that really echoes out for our listeners. So how can the findings of this paper benefit those working directly on building LLMs or language models? How does all this help?"}, {"Alex": "It emphasizes the importance of aligning reasoning capabilities with specific NLG evaluation tasks. Simply adding reasoning isn't enough; the architecture and training must be tailored for optimal results. Researchers should explore specialized fine-tuning regimens and task-specific reasoning strategies.", "Jamie": "Right. It\u2019s not just about slapping on a 'reasoning' sticker, but making sure it actually works in the right way. So, what about limitations? Were there any constraints or things you wish you could have explored further in the research?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely. One limitation is that there is no public confirmed information about the size of either 03-mini models or its GPT-40-mini equivalent. Also, because the API we used for 03-mini can only specify the reasoning effort and that there is no such option for DeepSeek and its distilled variants, this opens the door for more exploration.", "Jamie": "Gotcha. So, there's still a bit of a black box with those models. Where do you see this research heading next? What are the big questions that still need to be answered?"}, {"Alex": "Future work should investigate targeted enhancements to reasoning approaches designed for NLG evaluation contexts. We also need a deeper dive into the types of errors best identified by reasoning LLMs. Plus, more exploration in other reasoning model performance.", "Jamie": "So, it's about refining the tools, understanding their strengths, and pushing the boundaries. Finally, given your deep dive into this, what\u2019s the single most important takeaway for our listeners?"}, {"Alex": "The key takeaway is that reasoning capabilities don't automatically improve AI evaluation; it depends heavily on the model architecture, the specific task, and the alignment of reasoning strategies. We found out the power relies on integration and alignment.", "Jamie": "Great point. So as long as those capabilities are aligned and tuned in, the outcomes are much more relevant."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And it means we need to think critically about how we're building and evaluating these AI systems. The findings of our study reveals some interesting insights on AI systems.", "Jamie": "Thanks Alex, this has been an amazing peak into the other side of AIs and AI systems. For those looking to dig deeper, the full paper has been published!"}, {"Alex": "Thanks for having me, Jamie! It was a pleasure. To wrap things up, our study highlights that while reasoning-enabled LLMs hold promise for enhancing NLG evaluation, their effectiveness hinges on architecture, task alignment, and training. The mere presence of reasoning capabilities is insufficient. Further research into targeted enhancements and task-specific strategies is crucial to unlock their full potential.", "Jamie": "That's all the time we have for today! But, Alex, and our listeners have given us so much to chew on!"}, {"Alex": "Right, it's really a case of 'think before you think,' even for AI! And for us too!", "Jamie": "The bots are already thinking. Until next time!"}, {"Alex": "Take care folks. Keep it up!", "Jamie": "Yep! That is all from us for now!"}, {"Alex": "Goodbye for now! See you next time!", "Jamie": "Bye bye for now."}]