[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast where we unpack the most mind-bending research out there! Today, we're diving deep into author response guidelines, specifically for those nail-biting rebuttals in academic paper reviews. Get ready to unlock the secrets to crafting the perfect comeback because, let\u2019s face it, sometimes those reviewers are just plain wrong! I\u2019m Alex, your guide through this academic jungle, and I\u2019m thrilled to have Jamie here with me today.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! I\u2019m super excited to demystify this whole rebuttal process. Honestly, it always felt like navigating a minefield. I'm ready to ask you the dumb question!"}, {"Alex": "No dumb questions here, Jamie! Let\u2019s start with the basics. In the context of, say, an ICCV submission, what exactly is an author rebuttal, and why should authors even bother with it?", "Jamie": "Umm, yeah, great question! Let's start with it! I always wondered like, it feels like an extra step, you know? Is it really worth the effort?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely worth it! Think of the rebuttal as your chance to set the record straight. After reviewers critique your paper, you get this golden opportunity to address their comments directly. It's a limited, one-page PDF, but it\u2019s your stage to rebut factual errors, clarify misunderstandings, or supply crucial information the reviewers might have missed. Basically, it is your comeback to the reviewers.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. So, it\u2019s not just about saying, 'You're wrong!' but more about providing context or correcting misinterpretations?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It's about constructive engagement. You want to show that you've carefully considered their feedback and that you're actively addressing their concerns. A well-crafted rebuttal can significantly sway the reviewer's opinion in your favor, potentially turning a 'reject' into an 'accept'.", "Jamie": "Hmm, got it. Now, the paper mentions specific guidelines. What are some of the key 'dos and don'ts' that authors should keep in mind when writing their rebuttals?"}, {"Alex": "Alright, let's break it down. First and foremost: stick to that one-page limit! Overlength responses are simply ignored. You also want to maintain anonymity \u2013 no sneaky external links that could reveal your identity. And remember, it's about addressing the reviewers' points, not introducing brand-new material that wasn't in the original submission unless they specifically ask for it.", "Jamie": "So, no last-minute experiments to impress them. What about figures and tables? Are they fair game?"}, {"Alex": "Figures and tables are definitely allowed, and encouraged, to illustrate your points or compare results. But here's the catch: they should be results already reported in the submission, supplemental material, or in other papers. Don't try to sneak in new data under the guise of a figure.", "Jamie": "Gotcha! So, it\u2019s all about clarification and support, not new revelations. And what about the format? The paper mentions a specific style guide."}, {"Alex": "Yes, formatting is crucial! You need to adhere to the specified two-column format, font sizes, and margin settings. The paper mentions the total allowable text area and column widths, all derived from the specific LaTeX guidelines. Deviating from these guidelines can signal that you didn't pay attention to detail, which doesn't inspire confidence.", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's not just about content but also presentation. It's about showing that you can follow the rules."}, {"Alex": "Precisely! Think of it as academic etiquette. Now, one thing I always emphasize is to number your equations! It's such a simple thing, but it makes it so much easier for reviewers to refer to specific points in your response. And, make sure your numbering doesn't overlap with your paper, to avoid confusing reviewers.", "Jamie": "Ah, that's a great tip. I can see how that would be helpful. What about referencing other works? Any specific rules there?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! List all your bibliographical references in 9-point Times, single-spaced, at the end of your response. When referencing them in the text, use square brackets with the citation number. And again, pay attention to details like including editor names when appropriate. These small things add to the overall impression of thoroughness.", "Jamie": "This is all incredibly helpful, Alex. Any final tips for making a rebuttal really shine?"}, {"Alex": "One last thing: be professional and respectful, even if you strongly disagree with a reviewer's comment. Frame your responses constructively, focusing on the science and providing clear, logical arguments. A calm and well-reasoned rebuttal is far more persuasive than an angry or defensive one.", "Jamie": "Yeah that's a great tip! Okay, that all makes a lot of sense! I feel much more prepared to tackle the rebuttal process now."}, {"Alex": "You got it, Jamie! Now let\u2019s change the direction and move to figures. The paper mentions something about using `includegraphics` in LaTeX. Could you elaborate on that?", "Jamie": "Sure! I'm not that much familiar with Latex! Ummm, I am not that comfortable with Latex, but what is that command exactly? And why is it so important?"}, {"Alex": "`includegraphics` is your best friend when inserting images in LaTeX. It allows you to easily scale and position your figures within the document. The paper specifically recommends using it and specifying the figure width as a multiple of the line width, like `width=0.8\\linewidth`. This ensures that your figures scale appropriately regardless of the document's dimensions, maintaining readability.", "Jamie": "Ah, I see. So, it's a way to make sure the figures don't end up too big or too small, no matter how someone views or prints the document?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It's about ensuring a consistent and professional presentation. And that is a critical part of the whole picture. Speaking of readability, the paper stresses the importance of resizing fonts in figures to match the body text. Why is that so important?", "Jamie": "Umm, I guess it's about visual harmony, right? Making sure everything looks consistent and not jarring to the reader?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! Inconsistency in font sizes can be distracting and make it harder for the reader to focus on the content. By matching the font sizes, you create a seamless visual experience that enhances comprehension. In general, a well-prepared rebuttle would give a feeling of 'easy to understand' for the reviewer.", "Jamie": "Got it. So, it's all about making the reviewer's job as easy as possible. Now, the paper also touches on illustrations, graphs, and photographs. Is there anything specific to consider when using those visual elements in a rebuttal?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, definitely! The key is to ensure that all graphics are centered and resolvable in a printed copy of the response. Remember, reviewers might choose to print your rebuttal, so you need to make sure that all details are clear and legible, even in hard copy.", "Jamie": "So, no super-fine details that disappear when printed. That's a good point. Anything else about figures I should keep in mind?"}, {"Alex": "Just one more thing: always include a clear and concise caption for each figure. The paper even provides an example of a well-formatted caption. Make sure the caption accurately describes the figure and its relevance to your argument.", "Jamie": "Great! And regarding the overall tone of the rebuttal, should authors be defensive, or should they agree with everything the reviewers say?"}, {"Alex": "Neither! Aim for a professional and respectful tone, even if you disagree with a reviewer's assessment. Acknowledge their concerns, explain your reasoning, and provide evidence to support your claims. Remember, the goal is to persuade, not to antagonize.", "Jamie": "That makes sense. Okay, I think I have a pretty good grasp of the guidelines now. What would you say is the biggest mistake authors make when writing rebuttals?"}, {"Alex": "In my experience, the biggest mistake is failing to address the reviewers' concerns directly and specifically. A vague or dismissive response can be even worse than no response at all. Take the time to understand each reviewer's comments and provide a thoughtful and targeted reply.", "Jamie": "So, read carefully and answer directly. What kind of impact do you expect this research to have on the community?"}, {"Alex": "This is not a research, but a suggestion. The impact is on the quality of the research that everyone publishes. By following these guidelines, authors can improve the clarity, coherence, and persuasiveness of their rebuttals, increasing their chances of a successful outcome. And that translates to better science overall.", "Jamie": "That\u2019s awesome, Alex, thanks so much for explaining everything so clearly!"}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! So to wrap it up, remember that a strong author rebuttal isn't just about defending your work; it's about demonstrating your engagement with the peer-review process and your commitment to rigorous scholarship. It\u2019s a chance to clarify, persuade, and ultimately, contribute to the advancement of knowledge. It allows the reviewer to change their mind. Thank you for joining us!", "Jamie": "Thank you for having me! I learned a lot today!"}]