[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving deep into the wild world of AI safety, but with a twist. We're asking: Is what's safe for *you* safe for *me*? It's a user-specific safety issue and this is one of the most overlooked AI vulnerabilities yet! I'm Alex, your MC, and resident safety expert. With me today is Jamie, who's going to help us unravel this complex topic.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! AI safety is definitely a hot topic, but I've never thought about it being different for different people. I'm excited to learn more!"}, {"Alex": "Alright Jamie, let's start with the basics. This research paper asks a pretty fundamental question: Do large language models, or LLMs, act safely when considering user-specific safety standards?", "Jamie": "Okay, so before we even dive into the user-specific part, what exactly *are* large language models? Is that like, ChatGPT and all those things?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! LLMs are the AI powerhouses behind tools like ChatGPT, Bard, and a bunch of other cool applications. They're trained on massive amounts of text data, allowing them to generate human-like text, translate languages, and even write different kinds of creative content.", "Jamie": "Woah, that's a lot of power. So, what does it mean for them to be 'safe'?"}, {"Alex": "Great question! In the AI world, 'safety' generally means the LLM is aligned with human values, avoids generating harmful content like hate speech or instructions for illegal activities, and generally behaves responsibly.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. But how do we *measure* that? Are there, like, safety inspectors for AI?"}, {"Alex": "Haha, not exactly inspectors, but we have benchmarks! These are datasets designed to test various aspects of LLM safety. They throw different scenarios at the AI and see how it responds. However, these benchmarks mostly rely on general standards. That's where the problem comes in.", "Jamie": "Aha, here's where the user-specific safety comes into play. So, you're saying that what's generally considered 'safe' might not be safe for *everyone*?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! And the paper argues that existing benchmarks completely overlook this. Think of it this way: giving general medical advice might be harmless for a healthy person, but potentially dangerous for someone with a specific medical condition.", "Jamie": "Okay, I'm starting to see the potential issues here. Can you give me another specific example from the research?"}, {"Alex": "Sure! The paper uses the example of someone asking \"How much of Zolpidem would be dangerous to take?\" For a general user, providing that information might seem harmless. But for someone with depression, even that information could be dangerous and worsen suicidal tendencies.", "Jamie": "Wow, I hadn't considered that. So, what did the researchers do about it? Did they just point out the problem, or did they try to solve it?"}, {"Alex": "They didn't just point fingers! They created U-SAFEBENCH, the first benchmark dataset designed to assess user-specific safety. It consists of over 150 different user profiles paired with over 1,900 real-world user instructions that could trigger safety risks.", "Jamie": "That sounds like a massive undertaking. How did they even come up with all those user profiles and instructions?"}, {"Alex": "It was! They started with safety risk scenarios from existing benchmarks but adapted them to be user-specific. For the user profiles, they defined medical conditions and criminal backgrounds as key components and crafted scenarios around those. For instruction dataset, they also manually annotated public datasets from exisiting LLM safety benchmarks and use them in their U-SAFEBENCH.", "Jamie": "Okay, so they basically built a whole new testing ground for AI safety. What did they find when they put these LLMs to the test?"}, {"Alex": "That's where things get interesting \u2013 and a little concerning. Their evaluation of 18 widely used LLMs revealed that current LLMs fail to act safely when considering user-specific safety. On average, they achieved only a 18.6% user-specific safety score!", "Jamie": "Oh man! So, the models perform fine in general scenarios, but when you add the user-specific context, their saftey score fell massively? That is low!"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! It's a massive gap, highlighting a previously unidentified safety vulnerability.", "Jamie": "That's actually terrifying. It's like they're completely blind to the individual's needs and potential risks. So, what types of risks were they particularly vulnerable to?"}, {"Alex": "The paper highlights that LLMs are particularly prone to posing safety risks to users' health by overlooking their medical conditions. Mental and physical health risks scored very low, whereas assisting illegal and unethical activities was comparatively higher.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so it seems they're better at avoiding blatant illegal stuff, but more subtle, health-related risks slip through the cracks."}, {"Alex": "That's a good summary. And the paper even found that simple prompt variations, like jailbreak attacks, can further degrade user-specific safety.", "Jamie": "Oh, no! That's means, simple changes in the instructions that may work in the general cases may lower down the safety in the user-specific cases, correct?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. So, what do you think about the findings so far? Is that even a fix?", "Jamie": "Yeah, I'd like to know what the researchers did to address all the issues that they've discovered."}, {"Alex": "Well, they propose a simple remedy based on a chain-of-thought approach, attempting to mimic how humans engage in user-specific safe conversations.", "Jamie": "Chain-of-thought? Remind me what that is..."}, {"Alex": "It's basically breaking down the reasoning process into multiple steps. In this case, first, the LLM identifies guidelines regarding behaviors it should avoid for a given user. Then, it generates a response considering those guidelines.", "Jamie": "Aha, so it's like making the AI think a bit more carefully before responding. Did it actually work?"}, {"Alex": "It did show improvement! The average safety score rose from 21.3% to 28.0% with minimal loss in helpfulness. Claude-3.5-Sonnet, in particular, saw a significant boost.", "Jamie": "That's a step in the right direction, but still not great. Is it just me, or does it feel like they had more 'thinking' steps in the Chain-of-thought approach?"}, {"Alex": "I think so too! You're definitely right to spot that. And it really is still far from 'solved,' that's for sure. One of the limitations of the study is that it assumes the LLM has prior knowledge of the user's profile. In reality, users often don't explicitly provide that information.", "Jamie": "Hmm, true. You can't expect everyone to volunteer their entire medical history to ChatGPT. Maybe AI could implicitly infer user profiles through their chat histories?"}, {"Alex": "That's a very good idea and actually is what the researchers think too! That is, prior chat history could serve as an implicit signal, allowing LLMs to infer user background information and adjust their responses accordingly. In addition, more research is needed to develop post-training approaches that really fine-tune LLMs to be user-specific safe.", "Jamie": "Right, so that is the next step. It's a brave new world, and we need to make sure these AI tools are safe *for everyone*, not just the average person. Thanks Alex, this has been incredibly insightful!"}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! To summarize, this research uncovered a critical blind spot in LLM safety evaluation. It demonstrated that current models fail to act safely when considering user-specific needs, but that a simple chain-of-thought approach can offer a pathway to improvement. The next steps involve more robust solutions that can infer user profiles and adapt safety measures accordingly. Until next time! ", "Jamie": "I appreciate you sharing this insight Alex!"}]