[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving into a fascinating question: Can community notes, like on Twitter/X, actually replace professional fact-checkers? Sounds crazy, right? I'm Alex, and I've been buried in this research. With me is Jamie, ready to ask all the tough questions.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, super excited to be here! This sounds like a battle between the crowds and the pros. I'm curious, what sparked this investigation?"}, {"Alex": "Well, it's all about how platforms are changing their strategies. Twitter/X, and even Meta now, seem to be shifting away from partnerships with traditional fact-checkers and leaning more into community moderation. We wanted to understand if that was a smart move.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so is it like, 'Hey, let's see if the wisdom of the crowds can do a better job than the experts?' What exactly did your research entail?"}, {"Alex": "Essentially, we analyzed a huge pile of Twitter/X community notes, like over a million of them. Then, we used language models to annotate them, looking at things like what topics they covered, what sources they cited, and if they were actually refuting misinformation narratives.", "Jamie": "A million notes? Wow, that's a lot of data! What were some of the initial findings? Was it a clear win for the crowd or the fact-checkers?"}, {"Alex": "That's where it gets interesting. We found that community notes actually cite fact-checking sources way more often than we thought \u2013 up to five times more than previously reported!", "Jamie": "No way! So, the crowd is actually leaning on the experts more than we realized? I guess that throws a wrench in the 'replace' idea."}, {"Alex": "Exactly. And it gets even more specific. Notes that deal with broader, more complex misinformation narratives are twice as likely to reference fact-checking sources.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, when things get complicated, the community turns to the pros to untangle the mess. Can you give me an example of a 'broader narrative' you're talking about?"}, {"Alex": "Sure, think about something like 'COVID was intentionally spread' or a QAnon conspiracy. Those aren't just single, isolated claims; they're tied to a web of interconnected ideas. Debunking them requires more in-depth research that average users might not have the resources to do.", "Jamie": "Okay, I see. So, fact-checking isn't just about correcting a single statement, but about dismantling these larger, persistent narratives. What kind of specific strategies are community note writers doing?"}, {"Alex": "We categorized the different ways these notes are rebutting claims. One common strategy to help debunk claims is adding missing context or invalidate the credibility of the source of the original claim.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So, it sounds like there's more to it than just saying 'that's wrong!' It's adding context and discrediting sources. Umm, did the notes at least add scientific evidence to the claims they are trying to debunk?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, but especially with complex claims such as the 'Michelle Obama is a Man' theory are likely to incorporate with sources from fact-checking websites. ", "Jamie": "Wow, so when high-quality help is needed, they are more likely to be incorporated. "}, {"Alex": "Exactly! What's fascinating is that the community is more likely to cite an external fact-checking source rather than in-note fact-checking, ", "Jamie": "This makes a lot of sense, community members are more likely to link out the content for additional research than in-note checking."}, {"Alex": "Yeah. And we saw that the community has more ratings for 'helpfulness' when there is a link to high quality, scientific resources.", "Jamie": "Oh wow, that's impressive. So it's a blend of crowd sourced and professionally produced!"}, {"Alex": "What was also very interesting to see was that notes with fact-checking links are more likely to be regarded as having a good source and rated as helpful.", "Jamie": "So, when things get extra tricky, they are more likely to ask and use scientific evidence?"}, {"Alex": "Yup! Even when the community ratings are missing, notes are twice as likely to have a fact-checking source rather than not.", "Jamie": "So what are the major limitations with the research?"}, {"Alex": "Well, this study only studied the English based notes from Twitter/X, and excluded over half a million notes in other languages.", "Jamie": "So, what do you think are the key take-aways from this research?"}, {"Alex": "Our research really highlights how vital professional fact-checking is for community moderation to work effectively. The community relies on the experts, especially when dealing with complex misinformation narratives. It's not an either/or situation; they're deeply interconnected.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so what does this mean for platforms like Twitter/X and Meta?"}, {"Alex": "It suggests that platforms should be cautious about cutting ties with fact-checking organizations. Defunding and discrediting these organizations will ultimately hurt the quality of community moderation and make it harder to combat misinformation.", "Jamie": "So, they are basically shooting themselves in the foot?"}, {"Alex": "In a way, yes. They are undermining a crucial resource that their own community relies on.", "Jamie": "Are professional fact-checkers becoming obsolete? "}, {"Alex": "Well, the pressure from defunding is making these organisations more obsolete.", "Jamie": "So what do you think are the next steps in this sort of research?"}, {"Alex": "Well there needs to be a lot more research done on making these crowd-sourced based notes more reliable with high stakes information, such as health information. ", "Jamie": "And what can the community do to get involved?"}, {"Alex": "There are a lot of sources and information the general public can view online to learn about misinformation.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so what's the overall message or final conclusion for our listeners?"}, {"Alex": "Ultimately, our research shows that successful community moderation depends on high-quality professional fact-checking. Cutting funding and support for those experts is a dangerous path that could undermine the fight against misinformation and harm the quality of information more broadly. It's about understanding the relationship between community and fact-checkers.", "Jamie": "Thanks Alex!"}]