[{"Alex": "Hey podcast listeners, buckle up! Today, we're diving headfirst into the WILD world of 4D object understanding. Think robots, digital twins, and language all tangled together! It's like teaching your computer to 'see' not just a thing, but how it *changes* over time. Our guest, Jamie, is here to help us unravel this mind-bending research.", "Jamie": "Wow, Alex, sounds intense! 4D object understanding? I\u2019m picturing some kind of futuristic movie. So, to start simple, what exactly *is* 4D object understanding, and why should anyone care?"}, {"Alex": "Great question, Jamie! Imagine a 3D object \u2013 like a robot. Now, imagine it MOVING over time \u2013 maybe its arm is bending, or it's transforming. That's the fourth dimension: time. 4D object understanding is teaching AI to understand these evolving 3D objects. And it matters because it\u2019s key to digital twins, augmented reality, you name it. Anything where a computer needs to 'get' dynamic 3D scenes.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. So, it's not just seeing a static image, it's understanding *how* something changes. You mentioned digital twins. Are we talking, like, simulating a whole factory or something?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! Think simulating an entire factory, predicting wear and tear on machinery, or creating super realistic augmented reality experiences. The applications are HUGE. But to get there, AI needs to see these 4D objects with the same kind of intuition we do. And that\u2019s where the challenges come in, which the paper addresses head on.", "Jamie": "Hmm, so what specific challenges did your research focus on? What problems did you want to solve?"}, {"Alex": "Well, currently, MLLMs\u2014multimodal large language models\u2014are great at 2D image and video understanding, but they kinda fall apart when you throw 4D objects at them. There were NO standardized benchmarks to test this, so we decided to make one. We called it 4D-Bench. It tests how well these models understand 4D objects and can answer questions about them.", "Jamie": "So, you built your own test! That sounds like a big undertaking. Ummm\u2026 what kind of questions did this 4D-Bench involve? And what existing benchmarks did you use to inform the creation of your benchmark?"}, {"Alex": "We created two tasks: 4D object Question Answering and 4D object Captioning. Think of it like this: the AI is shown a multi-view video of a 4D object, and has to either answer a question or generate a description. We designed the questions to REALLY push their spatial and temporal reasoning abilities, requiring models to consider various views and the movement over time. For example, we considered benchmarks used for 3D-language or video-language benchmarks but adapted those questions and datasets to fit a 4D setting.", "Jamie": "Multi-view is an interesting term. Is it to prevent cases when some parts of the object is blocked? Is that correct?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. This is the main difference from the 2D image understanding. In the 2D image, if it is blocked, it is blocked and thus you have to infer it. While in the 4D case, you have to view the object through multiple views. So you will still be able to see the object.", "Jamie": "Okay, so MLLMs are great at still images and videos. How did you represent these 4D objects so these models could 'see' them?"}, {"Alex": "That\u2019s the key! We cleverly represented the 4D objects as multi-view videos. So, instead of feeding the AI some complex 3D data format, we gave it something it already understood: video. Then, the challenge became designing tasks that really required spatial-temporal understanding and couldn't be solved with just basic video analysis.", "Jamie": "That is a clever approach! So, you leveraged the existing capabilities of these models rather than trying to reinvent the wheel. What kinds of MLLMs did you test on your 4D-Bench?"}, {"Alex": "We threw a wide net. We tested both closed-source models like Gemini 1.5 Pro and the latest GPT-4o, and open-source models like Qwen2-VL and LLaVA. We wanted to see how everyone stacked up. And, spoiler alert, the results were surprising!", "Jamie": "Surprising how? What was the general performance like across the board?"}, {"Alex": "Well, first off, *everyone* underperformed compared to humans. Even GPT-4o, the state-of-the-art, only achieved around 63% accuracy on the QA task, while humans got 91%. This really highlighted how much of a gap there is in 4D object understanding. Some were better, but it also depends on what kind of objects you are talking about. For example, cartoons with characters or animals do better, but mechinary is much worse.", "Jamie": "Wow. Huge gap. Okay, so humans are still way ahead. What specific areas were these MLLMs struggling with the most?"}, {"Alex": "Object counting was a major sticking point. The models really struggled with accurately counting objects in dynamic scenes, especially when there was occlusion or things appearing and disappearing. They also showed the gap between how good models can do at appearance understanding vs action understanding. Even though it is simple and one-object testing, models are unable to understand the 4D.", "Jamie": "So, it's not just seeing *what* is there, but *how many* and *how* it interacts with the environment over time. Hmm, that sounds like a complex spatial-temporal reasoning. Any insights on why they struggled with object counting?"}, {"Alex": "It's all about integrating information from different viewpoints and tracking those objects through time. If a box is hidden in one view, they need to infer its existence from another. Plus, things change! A box might get covered by something else, so the model needs to keep track over time to give an accurate count. Our 4D-Bench makes it very clear, as well as the gap between appearance and action understanding.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes perfect sense. So, given these shortcomings, what are the next steps for improving MLLMs in 4D object understanding? What did you learn in particular from those tests?"}, {"Alex": "The results point to a few things. Firstly, we need better temporal-aware visual encoders. These are the 'eyes' of the model, and need to be more attuned to motion. Secondly, multi-view fusion is key. Models need to effectively integrate information from different camera angles to get a complete picture. And, surprisingly, just throwing more computing power at the problem isn\u2019t enough.", "Jamie": "It's not just about scale, it's about the architecture. That's good to know! You mentioned this is an out-of-distribution evaluation for MLLMs. Can you elaborate on why?"}, {"Alex": "Right! Unlike other tests using real-world videos, our 4D-Bench uses digitally created 4D assets, including counterfactual scenarios: six legs spiders or gravity defying balls. It is not trained on that. This pushes MLLMs to truly *understand* the scene, not just rely on pre-learned biases from real-world data. They really help in getting a comprehensive analysis, especially for those areas where the models may not have been explicitly trained.", "Jamie": "That makes the test particularly interesting and a great way to uncover blind spots. Before this research, have other attempts been made to measure 4D object language understanding?"}, {"Alex": "Surprisingly, no. While there's been lots of work in 2D image and video language understanding, and some in static 3D, 4D object language understanding has been largely unexplored. We really wanted to be the first to establish a benchmark for this. This gap underscores the novelty and importance of our research.", "Jamie": "This indeed breaks new grounds! Beyond the limitations of MLLMs, did the research revealed any potential improvements?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! First off, MLLMs do better at some things than others. For instance, they're pretty good at identifying objects and their attributes, like color and shape. But when it comes to understanding actions and temporal relationships, that's where they struggle. But even this understanding can be enhanced with the methods we discussed", "Jamie": "It sounds like this 4D-Bench could really push the field forward, helping researchers identify and address these weaknesses. What are the next steps for this project?"}, {"Alex": "We're planning to expand the 4D-Bench with more diverse objects, more complex motions, and more challenging questions. We're also exploring ways to automatically generate high-quality annotations to make the benchmark even more scalable. And of course, we're hoping this inspires the creation of better MLLMs that can truly understand the dynamic 3D world around us.", "Jamie": "This sounds awesome and it is indeed a great resource! Now, can current models be enhanced using some of the findings of the paper?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! By focusing on temporal-aware encoders and multi-view fusion strategies, researchers can tailor improvements to specifically address the weaknesses we've identified. Knowing that MLLMs struggle with object counting, for example, allows for targeted development of algorithms to improve performance in that area.", "Jamie": "That's super helpful. Are there any ethical considerations that come into play with this type of research?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely. As AI becomes better at understanding dynamic 3D scenes, we need to be mindful of potential biases in the data, and ensure these systems are used responsibly. For example, potential privacy concerns arise when analyzing dynamic human behavior. We will continue focusing on this.", "Jamie": "Absolutely. So, to wrap things up, what's the key takeaway from your research?"}, {"Alex": "The key takeaway is that while MLLMs have made incredible strides in 2D image and video understanding, they still have a long way to go when it comes to understanding the dynamic 3D world. Our 4D-Bench provides a valuable tool for evaluating and improving these models, paving the way for more advanced applications in robotics, digital twins, and augmented reality.", "Jamie": "That's a great summary, Alex! Thank you for the conversation on your awesome research and insightful study! I appreciate you taking time to come out."}, {"Alex": "Thanks Jamie for having me and for your awesome insights and questions! Thank you everyone for tunning in. For people interesting in this project, please check out our 4D-Bench website and read more about it! This is it for this week, see you all again next week!", "Jamie": ""}]