[{"Alex": "Podcast time, folks! Ever wonder what happens behind the scenes when you're scrolling through endless feeds on your favorite app? We're diving deep into a brand-new dataset that's spilling all the secrets of how we search, click, and engage! Buckle up, because we're about to unlock the mysteries of multimodal information retrieval!", "Jamie": "Wow, Alex, that sounds intense! Multimodal\u2026 retrieval? What's that even mean?"}, {"Alex": "Great question, Jamie! Basically, think of it as how systems understand and give you what you want when you're using different kinds of information \u2013 like text, images, videos all at once. So, if you search 'best tiramisu recipe,' the system uses the text, but also all the pictures and videos related to tiramisu to give you the *best* results.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense! So, we're talking about making search smarter using more than just words?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And the heart of our chat is the 'Qilin' dataset, a massive collection of user sessions from Xiaohongshu. It is a wildly popular social platform.", "Jamie": "Xiaohongshu, right, the lifestyle platform! What makes this Qilin dataset so special compared to, umm, other datasets?"}, {"Alex": "Well, Jamie, existing datasets are often limited to only text-based information. In contrast, Qilin offers a far more holistic view, capturing not just textual queries, but also users' interactions with diverse result types like image-text notes, video notes, commercial content, and even direct answers from a Deep Query Answering module.", "Jamie": "Deep Query Answering? Sounds futuristic. Can you explain that?"}, {"Alex": "Think of it as the system giving you a straight-up answer, not just a list of links. It\u2019s using AI to provide succinct and direct answers.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that\u2019s actually super useful. Does the dataset include the information needed for these kinds of answers? I mean, how do you train an AI on that?"}, {"Alex": "That's precisely where Qilin shines. It includes these user-favored answers along with the referred results. It makes it perfect for training and evaluating Retrieval-Augmented Generation, or RAG pipelines, and even exploring how these modules change user behavior.", "Jamie": "RAG pipelines, now you're just showing off, Alex! What does it mean and how would that data affects user behavior?"}, {"Alex": "A RAG pipeline is essentially how we combine retrieval models with large language models. So, the system first fetches relevant documents based on your query, then prompts the LLM to generate a coherent and contextually appropriate answer. Think of it as doing some research and giving a summarized form to the user. And, that directly impacts what users click on, how long they stay on a page, and their overall satisfaction.", "Jamie": "Wow, so it's a whole ecosystem of data and AI working together. Does the paper mention anything about the actual *users*? Are they all the same, or does user behavior change based on who they are?"}, {"Alex": "That's a key aspect! The dataset includes extensive APP-level contextual signals, such as the source of the query, the user's history, timestamps, location, and lots of genuine user feedback. The dataset highlights that users are diverse and exhibit varied patterns based on these factors.", "Jamie": "So, knowing where the search comes from really matters. Umm, does the paper uncover any specific interesting trends? Any, like, 'aha!' moments?"}, {"Alex": "Oh, definitely. For example, one thing we observed is how the DQA module significantly alters user behavior. When users are presented with direct answers, they tend to click on fewer results overall, but engage more intensely with the ones they do choose.", "Jamie": "That makes sense, if I got a direct answer I wouldn't spend time scrolling for other results!"}, {"Alex": "Right! It can be that they are indeed more satisfied or that the result layout is affecting user behavior, more specifically users might be getting more used to relying on the top answers. And that is exactly what the analysis enables us to study.", "Jamie": "Cool. Anything else?"}, {"Alex": "So, one area the paper explores is query reformulation. We analyzed how users modify their searches to get better results.", "Jamie": "Ah, like when you start with 'Italian food' and then change it to 'best Italian restaurant near me'? What did you find about how users reformulate on Xiaohongshu?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. Users commonly 'change' their queries, which accounted for almost half of all reformulations. That highlights the need for systems to better understand complex, evolving user intents.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So, the system needs to be smart enough to keep up with my train of thought as I'm refining my search."}, {"Alex": "Precisely! And knowing where users are coming from \u2013 whether it's a direct search, auto-completion, or a suggestion \u2013 also plays a big role. The study finds almost all of queries are from the auto-completion module.", "Jamie": "Wow, that's a lot. Do you think this mean that the suggestion and auto-completion feature is useful for users?"}, {"Alex": "Yes! So, improving suggestions will further improve user engagement, since the users may not even be searching if it wasn't of that feature!.", "Jamie": "Okay. I am now super curious how can you evaluate that?"}, {"Alex": "The research benchmarks multiple baseline approaches to evaluate our new dataset Qilin. For search and recommendation, we evaluated standard methods such as BM25, different versions of BERT, as well as DCN-V2. Also, different LLMs for the DQA task are used to evaluate the quality of the dataset", "Jamie": "And were there any approaches that perform the best among all?"}, {"Alex": "DCN-V2 perform the best in search ranking, especially when it comes to combining all those features into a combined model, it is also quite robust with noisy signals. However, we've got even more room to improve, particularly by truly understanding how images and text work together in people\u2019s minds!", "Jamie": "It seems like we have only talked about how search can benefits, does the model performs as well in recommendation?"}, {"Alex": "Similar in search ranking, DCN-V2 and VLM perform the best, which indicates it really needs a multimodal consideration in recommendation. Because users are more likely to scroll and click on videos in recommendation comparing to searching, considering those different format of data is pretty crucial to improve user experience.", "Jamie": "This is all fascinating, Alex. How do you see this Qilin dataset being used in the future?"}, {"Alex": "I envision researchers and developers using Qilin to build more sophisticated multimodal search and recommendation systems. We can also train LLMs with DQA module to provide better and more factual assistance for the user.", "Jamie": "So, what's the big takeaway here?"}, {"Alex": "The big takeaway is that the future of search and recommendation lies in understanding and leveraging the rich tapestry of multimodal information. Datasets like Qilin are crucial for unlocking this potential.", "Jamie": "Got it. Thanks for decoding the mysteries of multimodal information retrieval and the Qilin dataset. It's been enlightening!"}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! Thanks for joining me. To all listeners out there, always be curious, keep exploring, and remember: there's a whole world of data waiting to be discovered.", "Jamie": "Okay, good bye!"}]