[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving deep into a topic that's got me totally fascinated: how well our AI can *really* 'see' the world when things get a little... hidden. Think optical illusions, but for robots! We're talking about a new research paper that throws some serious shade\u2014pun intended\u2014on the vision skills of even the most advanced AI models. I'm Alex, your MC, and with me today is Jamie, ready to unpack this visual conundrum.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! This sounds intriguing. So, AI struggles with\u2026 hide-and-seek? That's kind of hilarious."}, {"Alex": "Essentially, yes! The paper introduces something called CAPTURE: Counting Amodally for Patterns Through Unseen Regions. It\u2019s a new task designed to test how well vision-language models \u2013 VLMs \u2013 can count objects when parts of those objects are hidden behind something, an occluder.", "Jamie": "Okay, CAPTURE. Got it. So it's not just about seeing things, but also about figuring out what's *not* there, right?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. Think of a checkerboard partially covered by a coffee mug. Humans can easily imagine the full checkerboard pattern and count all the squares, even the hidden ones. CAPTURE challenges AI to do the same.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, what kind of VLMs were put to the test?"}, {"Alex": "The researchers used some pretty heavy hitters: GPT-4o, Intern-VL2, Molmo, and Qwen2-VL. These are all state-of-the-art models, known for their strong performance in a variety of vision and language tasks.", "Jamie": "Right, the big guns. And how did they\u2026 capture\u2026 this counting problem?"}, {"Alex": "They created two datasets. One, CAPTUREreal, uses real-world images with manually placed occlusions. The other, CAPTURESynthetic, is a controlled diagnostic dataset with generated images, allowing them to tweak specific variables like color and object shape.", "Jamie": "Ah, so CAPTUREreal is like the messy real world, and CAPTURESynthetic is the controlled lab environment. Smart!"}, {"Alex": "Precisely. And the results? Well, that's where things get interesting. The models struggled, Jamie. Big time. They had significant error rates on both datasets, even when the objects weren't occluded!", "Jamie": "Wow, really? So they couldn't even count the *visible* stuff properly? That's\u2026 surprising."}, {"Alex": "It is! But here\u2019s the kicker: performance got *worse* with occlusion. This suggests that VLMs are not only bad at counting in general, but also deficient in inferring unseen spatial relationships. Even the mighty GPT-4o stumbled when things got hidden.", "Jamie": "So, it\u2019s not just about the counting; it's about not being able to 'fill in the blanks' mentally, like we do as humans."}, {"Alex": "You nailed it. The paper highlights this deficiency in forming what they call a 'world model' \u2013 an internal representation that allows us to reason about things we can't directly see.", "Jamie": "Umm, and how did humans fare on the same task? Were we just naturally better at spotting patterns?"}, {"Alex": "Humans crushed it. Near-perfect scores on CAPTURE. The paper points out that these skills develop early in childhood, which speaks to how fundamental they are to our perception.", "Jamie": "Okay, so AI has a long way to go before it can match a toddler's ability to play peek-a-boo. This is wild."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! So, the researchers also tried giving the models some 'hints', right? Did that help at all?", "Jamie": "Oh, that's clever! Like, giving them clues about where the hidden objects were, or something?"}, {"Alex": "Yes! They provided auxiliary information. First, they gave the models the exact coordinates of the *visible* objects as text. This drastically improved performance.", "Jamie": "Ah, so it helped them if they knew where the visible objects were located already. What if they told the VLMs where the hidden objects were?"}, {"Alex": "They also tried giving the models the coordinates of *all* the objects, visible and hidden. Unsurprisingly, this made them even better, almost perfect!", "Jamie": "Haha, I imagine! So, it's not that they can't count at all, it is that the models are really struggling with the counting in the images itself."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! They are struggling to 'see' and integrate the visual information. This aligns with other research showing VLMs can struggle with counting within images.", "Jamie": "This sounds like me trying to count sheep when I'm falling asleep. What else did they try?"}, {"Alex": "The researchers went a step further and used an image inpainting technique, where AI tries to fill in the missing parts of the image behind the occluder, and fed those 'fixed' images into the VLMs.", "Jamie": "Oh, like giving the AI a chance to 'imagine' what's behind the mug and then *count* that imagined picture."}, {"Alex": "Precisely! That also helped, but not as much as giving the models the object coordinates. It seems the ability to genuinely *imagine* the missing information is still a challenge.", "Jamie": "So, the models still need help seeing and imagining. Interesting!"}, {"Alex": "Yeah! In fact, the research tested what part of the task was difficult by tasking the VLMs to only count occluded objects; the models performed extremely poorly.", "Jamie": "These AI difficulties sound more and more like an actual person. That's fascinating."}, {"Alex": "It is, and it exposes a real weakness. Because in the real world, we're constantly dealing with occlusions. We infer what's behind objects all the time, without even thinking about it. This research shows that VLMs are not quite there yet.", "Jamie": "This does make you wonder, how can we solve this? And why does this even matter?"}, {"Alex": "It matters because if we want AI to truly understand and interact with the world, it needs to be able to handle these kinds of everyday visual challenges. Think about self-driving cars navigating cluttered streets, or robots working in warehouses with partially hidden objects.", "Jamie": "Okay, I see the bigger picture now. It's not just about counting cups; it's about building more robust and reliable AI systems."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! As for what's next, the paper suggests that we need to focus on improving VLMs' ability to form robust world models. This might involve incorporating more spatial reasoning training, or finding ways to better integrate visual and textual information.", "Jamie": "This was awesome, Alex. Thanks for unpacking this paper for me!"}, {"Alex": "Of course, Jamie! So, to sum it up, this research unveils a surprising blind spot in our most advanced AI: difficulty reasoning about objects hidden from view. It highlights the need to push beyond simple pattern recognition and towards more sophisticated world modeling capabilities. The next step may involve testing a VLM in different settings that can lead to more robust visual skills. Until then, human vision still reigns supreme. Thanks for joining us today, everyone!", "Jamie": "Thanks, Alex, great podcast."}]