[{"Alex": "Welcome to the podcast, everyone! Today, we\u2019re diving into the wild world of document understanding \u2013 think deciphering those super complex research papers or legal documents without losing your mind. We\u2019re asking, can AI really get it? We are going to talk about MDocAgent, a revolutionary new system!", "Jamie": "Wow, sounds intense! So, MDocAgent, what's the gist? What problems are we solving here?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! The problem is, existing AI often misses the big picture when dealing with documents that have both text and images. They tend to focus on one thing, ignoring the crucial interplay between them. MDocAgent aims to solve this by being a Multi-Modal Multi-Agent framework.", "Jamie": "Okay, I see. So, it's like giving AI a team of specialists instead of one generalist? How does that work?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! MDocAgent uses several specialized agents \u2013 a general agent, a critical agent, a text agent, an image agent, and a summarizing agent. They work together to understand the document's content.", "Jamie": "Hmm, interesting. Can you maybe give an example? I\u2019m trying to imagine how these agents collaborate."}, {"Alex": "Sure. Imagine a research paper with a complex diagram and detailed text explaining it. The general agent gives an initial understanding, then the critical agent identifies the key parts. The text and image agents then dive deep into their respective areas, and finally, the summarizing agent puts it all together into a coherent answer.", "Jamie": "That makes sense. So, it's not just about recognizing words or images, but understanding the relationship between them. Ummm, so what sets MDocAgent apart from other similar systems?"}, {"Alex": "Good question. Many systems rely on either text or image analysis separately. MDocAgent uniquely combines both and uses this multi-agent approach for a deeper understanding. The agents collaborate and refine each other's insights, improving accuracy.", "Jamie": "I see. So, it\u2019s the collaboration piece that's key. Now, how did you test this system? What kind of documents were you throwing at it?"}, {"Alex": "We tested MDocAgent on five benchmarks: MMLongBench, LongDocURL, PaperTab, PaperText, and FetaTab. These include research papers, website articles, and documents with a mix of text and visual elements.", "Jamie": "Okay, a pretty diverse range of documents. And what were the main findings? Did MDocAgent actually improve performance?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! We saw an average improvement of 12.1% compared to other state-of-the-art methods. That's a pretty significant jump, showing that MDocAgent is better integrating textual and visual cues.", "Jamie": "Wow, that\u2019s impressive. So, this multi-agent approach really makes a difference! But, I'm curious, is every agent equally important, or are some pulling more weight than others?"}, {"Alex": "That's a great question! We did some ablation studies, removing individual agents or groups of agents to see how performance changed. And it turns out, each agent contributes meaningfully to the overall accuracy.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So, it's like a well-oiled machine; take away one part, and the whole thing doesn't run as smoothly. What about the General Agent and the Critical Agent?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, both are important. When removed, significant performance drops was observed. The general agent establishes a crucial foundation by initially integrating both text and image modalities. Removing this step noticeably reduces the subsequent agents' capacity to focus their analysis of critical information and answer effectively.", "Jamie": "That\u2019s really interesting, to see how removing something that seems very core to the entire idea can affect the overall result."}, {"Alex": "Indeed. The consistent improvement over the baselines shows the importance of combining both text and image modalities through specialized agents within the framework.", "Jamie": "And what about compatibility with different image-based RAG backbones?"}, {"Alex": "We analyzed the compatibility of MDocAgent with different RAG backbones. Two image-based RAG models, ColPali and ColQwen2-v1.0, were used to show that choice of image-based RAG model has minimal impact on the framework's over- all effectiveness, underscoring the robustness of multi- agent architecture.", "Jamie": "Okay, so the core framework is pretty adaptable. Speaking of the underlying tech, what kind of models were used for the different agents?"}, {"Alex": "We used Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct for the text agent and Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct for the other four agents: general, critical, image and summarizing agent. We also used ColBERTv2 for text retrieval and ColPali for image retrieval.", "Jamie": "Got it, so a mix of specialized models tailored to their specific tasks. That sounds like a lot of moving parts. Were there any challenges in getting these agents to work together seamlessly?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely. One challenge was ensuring that the agents communicated effectively and didn't get bogged down in conflicting information. The critical agent plays a crucial role in filtering and prioritizing the most relevant details.", "Jamie": "That makes sense. So, the critical agent acts as a kind of traffic controller, making sure everyone's on the same page. Hmm, this all sounds incredibly complex! What are some potential real-world applications for MDocAgent?"}, {"Alex": "The possibilities are vast! Think about legal document analysis, where accurately understanding complex contracts with diagrams is vital. Or in scientific research, helping researchers quickly grasp the key findings from multiple papers. Even in education, it could help students learn from textbooks with complex visuals.", "Jamie": "Okay, I can see that. This could really speed up information processing in a lot of fields. It seems to me this has huge potential. What are the next steps for your research?"}, {"Alex": "We're exploring more advanced inter-agent communication techniques to enhance their collaboration and the integration of external knowledge sources to improve the overall results.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So, it is about refining the collaboration and integrating external knowledge!"}, {"Alex": "We want to enhance the collaboration and improve the integration with external resources, which will make MDocAgent more stronger.", "Jamie": "Okay. What else are you working on related to this topic. Could you tell more about the improvement,?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, the major issues MDocAgent addresses is the information overload, granular attention to detail and cross-modality understanding. We are dedicated to solving these issues to improve MDocAgent more effectively.", "Jamie": "That\u2019s really interesting, and it seems like there\u2019s still plenty of room to improve the whole idea. What about the limitation when you are developing MDocAgent?"}, {"Alex": "It\u2019s true that MDocAgent only addresses information overload, granular attention to detail and cross-modality understanding. But our framework cannot solve any type of problem for document reading. ", "Jamie": "Yes, I think I get it. Are there other researchers using your research? Or what direction is the field heading?"}, {"Alex": "Yes, other researchers are now using the framework of multi-agent for their research. Also, the current direction of document reading is heading in making it more human-like reading documents, which combines text and image understanding to derive a result.", "Jamie": "I got it. I hope I can see more research regarding this topic. By the way, who are the end users who use MDocAgent?"}, {"Alex": "MDocAgent does not specify the end users and can be used for all types of users, since it is a fundamental baseline. Researchers, government sectors, or private organizations can use MDocAgent.", "Jamie": "Okay, thank you. MDocAgent is an incredibly innovative approach to document understanding. It will become more human-like to the extent of even helping students learn from textbooks with complex visuals! Thank you again for joining us, Alex, and sharing your insights."}]