[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving headfirst into the fascinating world of multilingual AI! Imagine a single AI model fluent in dozens of languages... We're unpacking a groundbreaking paper about \"Babel: Open Multilingual Large Language Models Serving Over 90% of Global Speakers,\" and trust me, it's HUGE! We've got Jamie with us to explore this today. Jamie, welcome!", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, super excited to be here! Multilingual AI sounds like something straight out of Star Trek, so I'm eager to learn more."}, {"Alex": "So, Jamie, let's start with the basics. What's the big deal with multilingual language models? Why not just use translation software?", "Jamie": "Well, umm, I guess I always thought translation apps were good enough. What are we missing?"}, {"Alex": "That's a great question! While translation software is useful, these models can understand and generate text directly in multiple languages *without* needing to translate. It's like having a truly global AI brain. This paper introduces Babel, a new open-source model aiming to cover a massive range of languages.", "Jamie": "Wow, directly understanding... so it's not just shuffling words around, but grasping the *meaning* across different cultures?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And that's where it gets really powerful. Now, Jamie, What does the paper define as its target language demographic?", "Jamie": "Okay, so the paper mentions it covers 'over 90% of global speakers'. Does that mean *every* language, or are there specific ones it focuses on?"}, {"Alex": "They concentrate on the top 25 languages by the number of speakers. This includes some languages often overlooked by other open-source models, such as Hindi, Bengali, and Urdu.", "Jamie": "Hmm, interesting. So, it's not just about the *number* of languages, but also which ones are represented. Why are those 'under-resourced' languages so important?"}, {"Alex": "Because it's about inclusivity! Current models tend to prioritize languages with readily available, high-quality data, which are usually spoken in developed countries. This model aims to bridge that gap and make AI more accessible to a wider, more diverse global audience.", "Jamie": "That makes a lot of sense. So, how does Babel actually *do* this? I mean, creating a model that understands so many languages sounds incredibly complex."}, {"Alex": "That's the million-dollar question! Instead of traditional methods, Babel uses a \"layer extension\" technique. Think of it like adding extra floors to a building to make it taller, but in a structured way that doesn't mess up the foundation.", "Jamie": "Okay, so they're not just making the model bigger, they're adding to it in a smart way. But what about the different nuances in each language?"}, {"Alex": "That's where the data preparation comes in. The team put significant effort into optimizing their data-cleaning pipeline to ensure the highest possible data quality, especially for those under-resourced languages. They even used another AI to help classify the data.", "Jamie": "So, AI judging AI... that's wild! Does the model actually beat all the other ones?"}, {"Alex": "Well, they created two versions: Babel-9B and Babel-83B. Babel-9B is designed for efficient use, while Babel-83B sets a new standard for open multilingual LLMs. The evaluations showed it outperformed comparable open LLMs on multilingual tasks.", "Jamie": "Oh, a lite and a heavy version. What do you mean by efficient use? Will it run on my computer?"}, {"Alex": "Haha, maybe not the 83B version! But the 9B version is designed for research and local deployment. To your other question, the smaller version can perform impressively using open-source supervised fine-tuning datasets. The paper mentions Babel-9B-Chat leading among 10B-sized LLMs.", "Jamie": "That is pretty cool, that anyone can use this in theory. So, what would you say the biggest takeaway from the paper is?"}, {"Alex": "The biggest takeaway is that Babel demonstrates the importance of inclusivity in AI development. It shows that by focusing on under-resourced languages and using innovative techniques, we can create more accessible and powerful multilingual models.", "Jamie": "So, it's not just about being bigger, but also more equitable?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And Babel sets a strong foundation for future research in this area.", "Jamie": "What's next for Babel, or for multilingual AI in general?"}, {"Alex": "The paper mentions that incorporating more supervised fine-tuning data across diverse types, domains, and formats will further enhance the chat version. Also, alignment data and preference tuning will further its development.", "Jamie": "Can you expand on that? What type of fine tuning data are you talking about?"}, {"Alex": "Well Jamie, more SFT data and fine tuning that accounts for human nuances such as sarcasm. And, better datasets for training in low resource regions.", "Jamie": "Oh that's interesting. So, how accurate is this Babel data?"}, {"Alex": "Haha, it's definitely not perfect! All AI models have limitations and biases. However, the paper highlights Babel's superior performance compared to other open LLMs of comparable size, especially in those previously overlooked languages.", "Jamie": "What are the limitations of LLMs like Babel?"}, {"Alex": "Well, they can still struggle with understanding cultural context, generating creative text formats, and even basic reasoning. Also, there are ethical concerns surrounding bias and potential misuse.", "Jamie": "Where is the project headed?"}, {"Alex": "Currently, the project has plans to incorporate alignment data and preference tuning which should improve the chat version substantially. It will be interesting to see how they make the chatbot more human.", "Jamie": "What exactly is alignment data and preference tuning?"}, {"Alex": "Well Jamie, it all depends on the context. Essentially, you're working with both datasets, which is the alignment data, and the algorithm, which is preference tuning, to make AI more human.", "Jamie": "Very interesting. Are there any real world applications for AI's like Babel?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! Imagine more accurate and accessible translation services, improved cross-cultural communication, and even AI-powered education tools that can adapt to different languages and learning styles.", "Jamie": "Do you see any immediate applications for AI like this one?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely! In the immediate future, AI models like Babel can support customer service, and provide services to underrepresented regions of the world. AI like Babel can provide services from education, to entertainment, to the mundane.", "Jamie": "This has been enlightening, Alex! It's amazing to see how AI is evolving to be more inclusive and globally aware. Thanks for breaking it down for us!"}]