[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today we're diving headfirst into the wild world of AI software development, where coding meets cutting-edge research. We're tackling a groundbreaking paper on multilingual benchmarks for issue resolving. Get ready for some serious AI geek-out!", "Jamie": "Multilingual benchmarks, huh? Sounds intense! So, Alex, what's the big deal? Why do we need a new benchmark for AI in coding?"}, {"Alex": "Great question, Jamie! Existing benchmarks, like SWE-bench, are fantastic, but they're almost exclusively focused on Python. The real world of software is a melting pot of languages like Java, C++, TypeScript... This new benchmark, called Multi-SWE-bench, steps in to fill that gap, really challenging AI across a more realistic software ecosystem.", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's like expanding AI's coding vocabulary. Umm, makes sense! So what languages are we talking about exactly?"}, {"Alex": "The paper covers Java, TypeScript, JavaScript, Go, Rust, C, and C++. A pretty comprehensive lineup! And it includes over 1,600 high-quality instances. What's really interesting is how they carefully annotated these instances, ensuring the benchmark is accurate and reliable.", "Jamie": "Wow, that's a lot of languages. Annotation, hmm, sounds like a very labour intensive process. How was that done exactly to make sure the benchmark is top notch?"}, {"Alex": "You nailed it, Jamie. The annotation process is key. They started with over 2,400 candidates and had 68 expert annotators carefully examine each one. Dual annotation and cross-review was a MUST, they wanted to make sure they are all aligned with SWE-bench verified standards. Think of it like double-checking all the answers on a test to ensure there was top ground truth.", "Jamie": "That sounds incredibly thorough, I like that. So, with all these languages and meticulously reviewed instances, what exactly does Multi-SWE-bench test?"}, {"Alex": "At its core, it evaluates an AI's ability to resolve coding issues. The AI is tasked with modifying a codebase, generating a patch that addresses a given bug or feature request. It\u2019s not just about writing code; it's about understanding existing code, identifying problems, and applying effective solutions across different languages.", "Jamie": "Got it. So, it's like giving AI a real-world coding job, only with problems that it needs to figure out. So, what kind of methods and models did the researchers put to the test?"}, {"Alex": "They evaluated a series of state-of-the-art models using three representative methods: Agentless, SWE-agent, and OpenHands. And these methods are tested upon 9 different LLMs like GPT-4, Claude and DeepSeek.", "Jamie": "Those names sounds intimidating! What does each of the methods focus on in the tests?"}, {"Alex": "Each method is interesting. For example, Agentless tackles the task through a multi-stage fixed workflow. SWE-agent uses multi-turn interactions, almost like a conversation, and OpenHands serves as a platform for building software development agents. Each approach has its own strengths and weaknesses, as we'll see in the results.", "Jamie": "So, it's not just about the language, but also *how* the AI approaches the problem, right? What kind of metrics are we looking at to measure the performance of the models?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly! The primary metric is the ", "Jamie": "Resolved Rate,"}, {"Alex": "the percentage of issues the AI successfully resolves. But they also delve into other metrics, like success location, that measures accuracy of fault localization at file level, and average cost, that looks at the cost per issue.", "Jamie": "That really paints a full picture. So, after all that testing, what were some of the key findings? What did they discover about these AI models and their coding abilities?"}, {"Alex": "That's the million-dollar question, Jamie. Let me tell you. Models were consistently better performing in Python. They had significant struggles with other languages. But it's not that simple - the difficulty of the tasks also plays a HUGE role, and the models are less effective for anything human devs could solve in under 15 minutes. Interesting stuff, right?", "Jamie": "Whoa, that's pretty clear cut, huh? It almost sounds like AI has a favorite student when it comes to programming languages! Is it just that AI doesn't speak those other languages well, or is there more to it?"}, {"Alex": "There are a few reasons. Existing AI models are initially optimized for Python. Also, languages like C++ and Rust have unique characteristics like memory management, making it harder for the AI to handle. As the complexity of the task rises, AI needs to go deep in multi-component reasoning and cross-file context aggregation capabilities, which AI doesn't quite reach yet!", "Jamie": "Okay, so it's a blend of training, language complexity, and the AI's fundamental limits, that is making things harder for the machines... Beyond the language barriers, the report also mentioned new opensource initiative for reinforcement learning. Tell me more about that!"}, {"Alex": "Ah yes, the Multi-SWE-RL open-source community. This is HUGE. The researchers are releasing a dataset of over 4,700 containerized issue-resolving instances. This is a collaborative initiative aimed at building RL training data. To really train real-world AI coding.", "Jamie": "Containerized instances, I love it - reproducible research and easy experimentation! What's reinforcement learning got to do with it all anyway?"}, {"Alex": "The goal is to enable plug-and-play training for RL agents in realistic software contexts. It\u2019s about creating AI programmers that can learn and adapt through trial and error, just like human developers. It's that spark-igniting broader community interest in the construction of RL training data and paving the way toward fully autonomous agent systems.", "Jamie": "So, instead of just giving the AI the code, you let it *figure things out* through its own coding experiments. In a way, let the AI be a kid and code around."}, {"Alex": "You nailed it! It's like setting up a coding playground where AI can experiment and learn from its mistakes. The researchers hope that they can make a huge leap for AI's potential in the software industry.", "Jamie": "That sounds like a game changer, but I'm curious, what's the difference between SWE-bench and this new Multi-SWE-bench?"}, {"Alex": "SWE-bench is fantastic, but it's limited to Python. Multi-SWE-bench expands the scope to multiple programming languages, making it more representative of real-world software development. There are also significant differences in the structure of the test, and the evaluation.", "Jamie": "Okay, so Multi-SWE-bench is like the 'world tour' version of SWE-bench, covering more languages and more diverse coding environments. What about the performance of the various methods like Agentless, SWE-agent, and OpenHands?"}, {"Alex": "The tests showed that MopenHands mostly outperforms the others, with better flexible workflow beyond Python. Another highlight is that when issues have longer descriptions, models perform better because they rely on rich contextual grounding. This also meant that they need more advanced models to handle larger scopes of modifications.", "Jamie": "Interesting, so AI does appreciate a little bit of explanation. Hahaha. It really drives home the point that AI, at least for now, still needs guidance and clear context. So, what does this all mean? Is AI about to take over our coding jobs, or are we safe for now?"}, {"Alex": "Haha, coding jobs are safe for now, Jamie! What this research really shows is the *potential* of AI in software development. It highlights the areas where AI excels, the challenges it faces, and the path forward. We're not talking about replacing developers anytime soon.", "Jamie": "Okay, phew, that's a relief! So, what are the *next steps* for this research? Where do we go from here?"}, {"Alex": "Scaling Multi-SWE-bench and Multi-SWE-RL to more instances, languages, and modalities. Expanding its test scope into end-to-end project generation. Most of all, continue to build and innovate. In all, contribute to a data-centric infrastructure to build future researchers!", "Jamie": "In short, keep building, keep testing, and keep pushing the boundaries of what AI can do in the coding world. This has been incredibly insightful, Alex! Thanks for breaking down this complex research for us."}, {"Alex": "My pleasure, Jamie! Software engineers and AI continue to evolve together. The journey is still very ongoing. By establishing a sustainable and scalable process, future can only be brighter for us, the data lovers.", "Jamie": "So, what is the biggest take away here for our listeners?"}, {"Alex": "That AI shows a great potential in software engineering, and it highlights the path to take. It's only a matter of time before we unlock new levels of scalable data to make future research even better. For now, more hands on-deck to help the Multi-SWE-RL open-source community, will get us even closer to establishing the fully autonomous agent system in the far future!", "Jamie": "Thanks for being with us today! We will see you in another podcast soon!"}]