[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today, we're diving headfirst into a research paper that's basically the ultimate stress test for AI. We\u2019re talking about whether these fancy language models can *really* follow instructions when things get complicated. Think of it as, can your AI assistant handle not just telling you the weather, but also writing a sonnet about it, in the style of Shakespeare, while simultaneously avoiding mentioning the sun. Intrigued? I'm Alex, and I'm thrilled to have Jamie with us today, ready to unpack all of this.", "Jamie": "Hey Alex, thanks for having me! That intro definitely piqued my interest. So, AI's getting a reality check, huh? I\u2019m excited to see what's this all about."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! So, Jamie, to kick us off, imagine you\u2019re trying to explain this paper, WILDIFEVAL, to someone who's never heard of it. What\u2019s the elevator pitch?", "Jamie": "Okay, umm, if I had to give a quick summary, I\u2019d say it's about a new, massive dataset that tests how well AI models can follow complex instructions. It\u2019s not just simple commands, but instructions with multiple conditions\u2014like making a sandwich but only using ingredients starting with the letter 'P'. Is that the right idea?"}, {"Alex": "Spot on! It's a dataset of over 12,000 real-world user instructions. That\u2019s the WILDIFEVAL dataset. What sets this apart is that these instructions are complex, with multiple constraints, and come straight from real users. It's a step up from AI just doing what it's told; now, it has to juggle multiple demands at once.", "Jamie": "Wow, 12,000 instructions! So, how did you actually collect these instructions, and what makes them different from other datasets that already test AI\u2019s instruction-following abilities?"}, {"Alex": "That's a great question, Jamie. These instructions were pulled from LMSYS Chatbot Arena, a platform where users interact with different AI models. The key difference is the 'in the wild' aspect. Unlike datasets with carefully crafted constraints, these are natural user queries, messy and varied, reflecting real-world scenarios. Think of it as the difference between a lab experiment and observing animals in their natural habitat.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, it's like capturing the chaos of real-world requests, which I imagine can get pretty complicated. Once you had all this data, how did you actually break it down and analyze it?"}, {"Alex": "We had to dissect each instruction into its individual constraints. For example, an instruction like, \u201cSummarize this movie review in two paragraphs, with the first focusing on the plot and the second discussing reasons to watch or skip,\u201d has at least two constraints: length and content focus. We then categorized these constraints into eight high-level classes.", "Jamie": "Eight classes, huh? What kind of classes? Is it like, length, tone, topic\u2026?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! We landed on categories like 'Include/Avoid,' which dictates specific content, 'Format and Structure,' covering layout, 'Style and Tone,' defining the voice, 'Length,' setting quantitative boundaries, and others like 'Focus/Emphasis,' 'Persona/Role,' 'Ensure Quality,' and 'Editing' . This categorization helped us understand what types of constraints are most common and how they interact.", "Jamie": "Interesting. So, what did you actually *find* when you looked at the types of constraints people were using? Were there any surprises?"}, {"Alex": "Definitely. The most common were 'Include/Avoid' and 'Focus/Emphasis,' showing users often specify what content to include or avoid, or what elements to prioritize. But it was also interesting to see how constraints combine. 'Editing' often appeared with 'Ensure Quality,' suggesting that users want AI to refine existing text while maintaining a certain standard.", "Jamie": "That's actually pretty insightful. So, it's not just about *what* people ask for, but *how* they ask for it. So, once you had your dataset and your categories, how did you use WILDIFEVAL to actually test these language models?"}, {"Alex": "We put 14 different language models, varying in size and architecture, through WILDIFEVAL. We gave each model the task instructions and then evaluated how well their responses fulfilled the constraints.", "Jamie": "And how did you measure that? Did you have humans manually checking each response, or did you come up with some automated way to do it?"}, {"Alex": "Great question! We used another language model, specifically Llama3.1-70b, as a judge. It evaluated whether each constraint was fulfilled in the model's response. Of course, we validated the judge's accuracy with human annotations on a subset of the data, and found a pretty good agreement rate.", "Jamie": "Okay, so AI judging AI \u2013 that's meta! But it also sounds efficient. So, after all that testing, what were the main takeaways? Which models performed the best, and where did they struggle?"}, {"Alex": "Well, the best-performing models achieved a score of around 0.65, indicating there's plenty of room for improvement across the board. We found that larger models generally performed better, aligning with previous studies. But all models struggled as the number of constraints increased, particularly with length-related constraints.", "Jamie": "Aha, so even the big guys have their limits! It\u2019s interesting that length was a particular pain point. I guess counting words while trying to be creative is harder than it looks, even for an AI."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! And it wasn't just the number of constraints, but the type. Models seemed to struggle more with length constraints, possibly because they require precise counting and planning.", "Jamie": "Hmm, that makes sense. So, it sounds like WILDIFEVAL is really highlighting the areas where these models still need work. Did you notice any differences in performance based on the *types* of models you tested? Were some architectures better suited for certain kinds of constraints?"}, {"Alex": "That's a keen observation, Jamie. We did see some variations. For instance, some models showed better agreement with style and tone constraints, while others performed well on accurately covering the details as instructed.", "Jamie": "So, WILDIFEVAL wasn\u2019t just a stress test, but also kind of a diagnostic tool for figuring out what each model is good at, that sounds nice! Now that you've built this benchmark, what do you hope other researchers will do with it?"}, {"Alex": "Our primary goal is to foster further research on instruction following. We hope researchers will use WILDIFEVAL to develop more robust models, explore different training techniques, and investigate the nuances of constraint satisfaction.", "Jamie": "Yeah I think WILDIFEVAL will definitely push the limit, Alex. It seems like instruction following is becoming more important as we're getting closer to the LLM's reality. Talking about the future, do you have any plans of your own for further research based on what you've learned from this study?"}, {"Alex": "Absolutely! One area we\u2019re keen to explore is how to leverage constrained generation for prompt engineering. Can we use the insights from WILDIFEVAL to create prompts that are more effective at eliciting the desired responses from language models? We're also interested in finding ways to extract feedback from user interactions to improve constrained generation performance.", "Jamie": "Okay, that sounds like a solid plan, and I think that's it's gonna give great inspiration to improve a lot!"}, {"Alex": "One important thing to remember is that our dataset relies on an LLM to decompose the task and another LLM to judge. It will be important to explore how we can use external tools, like search, that could more definitively asses tasks like information retrieval or more dynamic evaluation methods based on the constraint type.", "Jamie": "That's a very good point Alex, I can imagine that we have a lot of space to improve. One thing that still seems a bit vague is what is a 'constraint' and what is the 'task' itself. When you decompose the directions in WildIFEVAL, some constraints seem to be closely reflecting the tasks. I'm sure that this is gonna make it really hard for us, but the dataset looks great though!"}, {"Alex": "That's true, there is still a lot to explore! We do have some ideas though, perhaps we can even include the decomposition in the prompt! Or maybe even use model performance analysis to identify more effective phrasings of constraints, you know? Let's see where that takes us...", "Jamie": "Sounds really exciting, I can't wait to see more!"}, {"Alex": "So, to summarize, WILDIFEVAL is more than just a dataset; it's a diagnostic tool that uncovers the strengths and weaknesses of language models in following complex instructions. The findings point towards the need for models that can better juggle multiple constraints, particularly those related to length, and highlight the importance of understanding how different constraint types impact model performance.", "Jamie": "It's also like a starting point for diving deep into realistic examples! The natural behavior in user scenario is truly important as this LLM industry comes so far. As this research shows, there's still a long way to go, but WILDIFEVAL provides a valuable roadmap for getting there."}, {"Alex": "And that's a wrap! Huge thanks to Jamie for joining me today and helping unpack this fascinating research. To our listeners, we hope this conversation has given you a clearer picture of where AI stands in terms of instruction following and what challenges lie ahead. And remember, the next time you're asking your AI assistant for something complex, appreciate all the behind-the-scenes work it's doing to make it happen!", "Jamie": "Thanks for having me, Alex! This was really insightful and I learned a lot. Excited to see what comes next in this field!"}, {"Alex": "Thanks Jamie! For our listeners, this is definitely an exciting turning point for AI-human interaction. Understanding these AI\u2019s, also means understanding what can make us even smarter and closer to the truth.", "Jamie": "It was amazing!"}, {"Alex": "Until next time, this is Alex, signing off! Keep exploring, keep questioning, and keep pushing the boundaries of what's possible. See you soon!", "Jamie": "Bye everyone!"}]