[{"Alex": "Hey everyone, and welcome to the podcast! Today we're diving headfirst into the wild world of AI... but with a twist of Korean education! Get ready to find out if AI can actually pass a Korean college entrance exam! It's either genius-level or total chaos!", "Jamie": "Wow, Alex, that's a bold claim! Passing the *Suneung*? Seriously? I thought AI was all about cat videos and writing marketing copy."}, {"Alex": "Haha, that's the surface, Jamie. But Large Language Models, or LLMs, are getting seriously smart. The paper we\u2019re discussing, 'Evaluating Multimodal Generative AI with Korean Educational Standards', introduces a new benchmark called KoNET to really test AI's intelligence using Korean national educational tests.", "Jamie": "KoNET\u2026 Okay, that makes sense. So, it's a test specifically designed for Korean educational standards. What kind of tests are we talking about here? Is it just one giant exam?"}, {"Alex": "Nope, KoNET is a compilation of four exams. There's the Korean Elementary, Middle, and High school GED tests, plus the big one: the College Scholastic Ability Test, or *KOCSAT*. Think of it as AI going through the entire Korean education system, from kindergarten to college entrance!", "Jamie": "Whoa, okay, that sounds intense. So, what exactly is the point? Are they just trying to see if AI can regurgitate information, or is it something deeper?"}, {"Alex": "It's about genuine intelligence, Jamie. The *KOCSAT*, for example, is known for its rigorous standards and diverse questions. The researchers are evaluating how well AI can generalize to novel tasks, mimicking human cognition. Plus, it's a great way to see how AI performs with less-explored languages like Korean.", "Jamie": "Ah, the language aspect is interesting! Most AI benchmarks are in English, right? So, this KoNET thing fills a gap?"}, {"Alex": "Exactly. It pushes AI beyond its English comfort zone. The paper looks at a range of models \u2013 open source, open access and closed API \u2013 to see how they handle difficulties, subject diversity, and even\u2026 *human error rates*.", "Jamie": "Human error rates? Now, that's a clever twist! So, they are actually comparing the AI not just to a perfect score, but to how *humans* actually perform under pressure?"}, {"Alex": "Precisely! They got the data of human\u2019s error rate by utilizing KOCSAT includes data on the percentage of incorrect responses per item among examinees which facilitates thorough comparisons of model behaviors with human performance. This gives you a realistic baseline, helps understand where the AI struggles in similar ways to students.", "Jamie": "Okay, this is way more sophisticated than I initially thought. So, what kind of questions are actually *on* these KoNET exams? Give me an example!."}, {"Alex": "Well, the questions range from multiple-choice knowledge tests to text comprehension and even multimodal comprehension questions. The level of complexity increases with each educational stage. For example, in math, you might see a simple arithmetic problem in the elementary test.", "Jamie": "Umm, okay, simple arithmetic. What would a high-school level question look like?"}, {"Alex": "At the high school level, KoHGED, you might get questions based on Korean literary works, or complex problems that require integrating information from text and diagrams. Remember that literary work Yongbieocheonga?", "Jamie": "Oh, that rings a bell, maybe from some distant memory from Korean high school history lessons. How on earth would an AI handle something like that?"}, {"Alex": "That's the key! Models lacking cultural context really struggled. The EXAONE model which specifically designed for the Korean language performed much better. This underscores how cultural specificity significantly impacts AI performance.", "Jamie": "So, it's not just about raw processing power; it's about understanding Korean culture and history to actually answer the questions correctly. Hmm, that makes a lot of sense."}, {"Alex": "Exactly! The researchers also looked at whether AI's errors mirrored human errors. Turns out, AI models often excel in comprehension but struggle with memorization, especially in long-tail questions - basically, those obscure facts that come up on exams like the CSAT. ", "Jamie": "Oh, man, those questions are *designed* to trip you up! So, AI is falling into the same trap, that's wild! That's super interesting. What about how all these different AI models perform in KoNET?"}, {"Alex": "The results varied significantly. Larger models generally performed better, but there was a big gap between closed-source APIs and open-source models, especially on KoNET. This suggests that open-source models need more Korean-specific tuning.", "Jamie": "So, the closed-source models, the ones probably backed by big Korean companies, have an advantage because they're optimized for the Korean language and culture. Makes sense."}, {"Alex": "Exactly. Also, the EXAONE model, which is specifically designed for Korean, significantly outperformed other models of similar size. Reinforcing the importance of the model fully understand the Korean context.", "Jamie": "Okay, so a model that is tailored to a specific language and culture does better on a test tailored to that language and culture. Not exactly shocking, but good to have the data to back that up! What else did they find about the models performance?"}, {"Alex": "Well here's an intersting data, researchers found that, MLLMs are sometimes lagging behind LLMs on KoNET, contrary to other benchmarks. That is to say, having the multimodal supports somehow undermines the AI's performance.", "Jamie": "Hmm, you'd think MLLMs will win, but sometimes simple is better in certain contexts."}, {"Alex": "Yeah, the data suggests that public LLMs may actually achieve better performance when supported by Korean OCR (Optical Character Recognition). It might be struggling on recognizing the Korean characters.", "Jamie": "OK, so reading images of Korean text is its achilles heel. You mentioned earlier that they use LLM-as-a-Judge. What exactly is that, and why didn't they just grade them manually?"}, {"Alex": "LLM-as-a-Judge uses another powerful language model, in this case, GPT-4, to automatically evaluate the AI's answers. It saves a *ton* of time and minimizes potential human errors in grading.", "Jamie": "Right, because grading hundreds of these exams manually would be a nightmare! So, GPT-4 is basically the ultimate teacher grading everyone's homework. That's actually pretty smart."}, {"Alex": "It's efficient! The researchers also compared this automated grading with manual grading and found a high agreement rate, meaning the AI is a reliable judge.", "Jamie": "That's key. You don't want the AI grading the AI and getting everything wrong! So, beyond just seeing if AI can pass a test, what's the real-world application here?"}, {"Alex": "The potential is huge for AI-driven educational technologies, especially AI tutoring. KoNET provides a benchmark to develop AI tutors that can understand and respond to students in a culturally relevant way.", "Jamie": "Okay, that makes sense. A personalized AI tutor that actually *gets* the nuances of the Korean education system. That could be a game-changer!"}, {"Alex": "It could be! The researchers acknowledge that KoNET primarily uses a multiple-choice format, which has limitations, but it's a strong foundation for future work. They are planning to enhance it by incorporating rationales behind the answers and building comprehensive reference answers. This also means considering the increases of computing costs.", "Jamie": "So, more in-depth reasoning and justification, kind of like showing your work on a math problem. That sounds like a natural next step."}, {"Alex": "Exactly. It\u2019s also designed to be continuously updated using new versions of the national tests, so it will stay relevant. By open-sourcing the dataset builder, they're empowering the research community to contribute and improve KoNET, ensuring its ongoing relevance and utility.", "Jamie": "It sounds like KoNET is more than just a benchmark. It's designed to *become* a community-driven resource."}, {"Alex": "Precisely! It's really encouraging research in multimodal and multilingual AI. So, the takeaway here is AI is getting smarter, but cultural context matters big time, and benchmarks like KoNET are crucial for developing AI that is truly intelligent and helpful for everyone, not just English speakers.", "Jamie": "Well, Alex, this has been fascinating! I never thought I'd be this interested in AI taking Korean exams, but you've really opened my eyes to the complexities and the potential. Thanks for sharing your expertise with us today."}]